THE

FIRST SATIRE

OF

JUVENAL.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _The Poet gives us first a kind of humorous reason for his
      writing: that being provoked by hearing so many ill poets
      rehearse their works, he does himself justice on them, by
      giving them as bad as they bring. But since no man will
      rank himself with ill writers, it is easy to conclude,
      that if such wretches could draw an audience, he thought
      it no hard matter to excel them, and gain a greater esteem
      with the public. Next, he informs us more openly, why he
      rather addicts himself to satire than any other kind of
      poetry. And here he discovers, that it is not so much
      his indignation to ill poets as to ill men, which has
      prompted him to write. He, therefore, gives us a summary
      and general view of the vices and follies reigning in his
      time. So that this first satire is the natural ground-work
      of all the rest. Herein he confines himself to no one
      subject, but strikes indifferently at all men in his way.
      In every following satire he has chosen some particular
      moral which he would inculcate; and lashes some particular
      vice or folly, (an art with which our lampooners are not
      much acquainted). But our poet being desirous to reform his
      own age, and not daring to attempt it by an overt-act of
      naming living persons, inveighs only against those who were
      infamous in the times immediately preceding his, whereby
      he not only gives a fair warning to great men, that their
      memory lies at the mercy of future poets and historians,
      but also, with a finer stroke of his pen, brands even the
      living, and personates them under dead men's names._

    _I have avoided, as much as I could possibly, the borrowed
      learning of marginal notes and illustrations, and for
      that reason have translated this satire somewhat largely;
      and freely own, (if it be a fault,) that I have likewise
      omitted most of the proper names, because I thought they
      would not much edify the reader. To conclude, if in two
      or three places I have deserted all the commentators, it is
      because I thought they first deserted my author, or at
      least have left him in so much obscurity, that too much
      room is left for guessing._

    Still shall I hear, and never quit the score,
    Stunned with hoarse Codrus'[51] Theseid, o'er and o'er?
    Shall this man's elegies and t'other's play
    Unpunished murder a long summer's day?
    Huge Telephus,[52] a formidable page,
    Cries vengeance; and Orestes'[53] bulky rage,
    Unsatisfied with margins closely writ,
    Foams o'er the covers, and not finished yet.
    No man can take a more familiar note
    Of his own home, than I of Vulcan's grott,
    Or Mars his grove,[54] or hollow winds that blow
    From Ætna's top, or tortured ghosts below.
    I know by rote the famed exploits of Greece,
    The Centaurs' fury, and the Golden Fleece;
    Through the thick shades the eternal scribbler bawls,
    And shakes the statues on their pedestals.
    The best and worst[55] on the same theme employs
    His muse, and plagues us with an equal noise.
      Provoked by these incorrigible fools,
    I left declaiming in pedantic schools;
    Where, with men-boys, I strove to get renown,
    Advising Sylla to a private gown.[56]
    But, since the world with writing is possest,                      }
    I'll versify in spite; and do my best,                             }
    To make as much waste paper as the rest.                           }
      But why I lift aloft the satire's rod,
    And tread the path which famed Lucilius[57] trod,
    Attend the causes which my muse have led:--
    When sapless eunuchs mount the marriage-bed;
    When mannish Mævia,[58] that two-handed whore,
    Astride on horseback hunts the Tuscan boar;
    When all our lords are by his wealth outvied,
    Whose razor on my callow beard was tried;[59]
    When I behold the spawn of conquered Nile,
    Crispinus, both in birth and manners vile,[60]
    Pacing in pomp, with cloak of Tyrian dye,
    Changed oft a-day for needless luxury;
    And finding oft occasion to be fanned,
    Ambitious to produce his lady-hand;
    Charged with light summer-rings his fingers sweat,[61]
    Unable to support a gem of weight:
    Such fulsome objects meeting every where,
    'Tis hard to write, but harder to forbear.
      To view so lewd a town, and to refrain,
    What hoops of iron could my spleen contain!
    When pleading Matho, borne abroad for air,[62]
    With his fat paunch fills his new-fashioned chair,
    And after him the wretch in pomp conveyed,
    Whose evidence his lord and friend betrayed,
    And but the wished occasion does attend                            }
    From the poor nobles the last spoils to rend,                      }
    Whom even spies dread as their superior fiend,                     }
    And bribe with presents; or, when presents fail,
    They send their prostituted wives for bail:
    When night-performance holds the place of merit,
    And brawn and back the next of kin disherit;
    (For such good parts are in preferment's way,)
    The rich old madam never fails to pay
    Her legacies, by nature's standard given,
    One gains an ounce, another gains eleven:
    A dear-bought bargain, all things duly weighed,
    For which their thrice concocted blood is paid.
    With looks as wan, as he who in the brake
    At unawares has trod upon a snake;
    Or played at Lyons a declaiming prize,
    For which the vanquished rhetorician dies.[63]
      What indignation boils within my veins,                          }
    When perjured guardians, proud with impious gains,                 }
    Choke up the streets, too narrow for their trains!                 }
    Whose wards, by want betrayed, to crimes are led
    Too foul to name, too fulsome to be read!
    When he who pilled his province 'scapes the laws,
    And keeps his money, though he lost his cause;
    His fine begged off, contemns his infamy,
    Can rise at twelve, and get him drunk ere three;
    Enjoys his exile, and, condemned in vain,
    Leaves thee, prevailing province, to complain.[64]
      Such villanies roused Horace into wrath;
    And tis more noble to pursue his path,[65]
    Than an old tale of Diomede to repeat,                             }
    Or labouring after Hercules to sweat,                              }
    Or wandering in the winding maze of Crete;                         }
    Or with the winged smith aloft to fly,
    Or fluttering perish with his foolish boy.
      With what impatience must the muse behold
    The wife, by her procuring husband sold?
    For though the law makes null the adulterer's deed
    Of lands to her, the cuckold may succeed,
    Who his taught eyes up to the ceiling throws,
    And sleeps all over but his wakeful nose.
    When he dares hope a colonel's command,
    Whose coursers kept, ran out his father's land;
    Who yet a stripling, Nero's chariot drove,                         }
    Whirled o'er the streets, while his vain master strove             }
    With boasted art to please his eunuch love[66]                     }
      Would it not make a modest author dare
    To draw his table-book within the square,
    And fill with notes, when, lolling at his ease,
    Mecænas-like,[67] the happy rogue he sees
    Borne by six wearied slaves in open view,
    Who cancelled an old will, and forged a new;
    Made wealthy at the small expence of signing
    With a wet seal, and a fresh interlining?
    The lady, next, requires a lashing line,
    Who squeezed a toad into her husband's wine:
    So well the fashionable medicine thrives,
    That now 'tis practised even by country wives;
    Poisoning, without regard of fame or fear,
    And spotted corpse are frequent on the bier.
    Wouldst thou to honours and preferments climb?
    Be bold in mischief, dare some mighty crime,
    Which dungeons, death, or banishment deserves;
    For virtue is but dryly praised, and starves.
    Great men to great crimes owe their plate embost,                  }
    Fair palaces, and furniture of cost,                               }
    And high commands; a sneaking sin is lost.                         }
    Who can behold that rank old letcher keep
    His son's corrupted wife, and hope to sleep?[68]
    Or that male-harlot, or that unfledged boy,
    Eager to sin, before he can enjoy?
    If nature could not, anger would indite
    Such woful stuff as I or Sh----ll[69] write.
      Count from the time, since old Deucalion's boat,
    Raised by the flood, did on Parnassus float,[70]
    And, scarcely mooring on the cliff, implored
    An oracle how man might be restored;
    When softened stones and vital breath ensued,
    And virgins naked were by lovers viewed;
    What ever since that golden age was done,
    What human kind desires, and what they shun;
    Rage, passions, pleasures, impotence of will,
    Shall this satirical collection fill.
      What age so large a crop of vices bore,
    Or when was avarice extended more?
    When were the dice with more profusion thrown?
    The well-filled fob not emptied now alone,
    But gamesters for whole patrimonies play;
    The steward brings the deeds which must convey
    The lost estate: what more than madness reigns,
    When one short sitting many hundreds drains,
    And not enough is left him to supply                               }
    Board-wages, or a footman's livery?                                }
      What age so many summer-seats did see?                           }
    Or which of our forefathers fared so well,
    As on seven dishes at a private meal?
    Clients of old were feasted; now, a poor
    Divided dole is dealt at the outward door;
    Which by the hungry rout is soon dispatched:
    The paltry largess, too, severely watched,
    Ere given; and every face observed with care,
    That no intruding guest usurp a share.
    Known, you receive; the crier calls aloud                          }
    Our old nobility of Trojan blood,                                  }
    Who gape among the crowd for their precarious food.                }
    The prætor's and the tribune's voice is heard;
    The freedman jostles, and will be preferred;
    First come, first served, he cries; and I, in spite
    Of your great lordships, will maintain my right;
    Though born a slave, though my torn ears are bored,[71]
    'Tis not the birth, 'tis money makes the lord.
    The rents of five fair houses I receive;
    What greater honours can the purple give?
    The poor patrician is reduced to keep,
    In melancholy walks, a grazier's sheep:
    Not Pallus nor Licinius[72] had my treasure;
    Then let the sacred tribunes wait my leisure.
    Once a poor rogue, 'tis true, I trod the street,
    And trudged to Rome upon my naked feet:
    Gold is the greatest God; though yet we see
    No temples raised to money's majesty;
    No altars fuming to her power divine,
    Such as to valour, peace, and virtue shine,
    And faith, and concord; where the stork on high[73]                }
    Seems to salute her infant progeny,                                }
    Presaging pious love with her auspicious cry.--                    }
      But since our knights and senators account,
    To what their sordid begging vails amount,
    Judge what a wretched share the poor attends,
    Whose whole subsistence on those alms depends!
    Their household fire, their raiment, and their food,
    Prevented by those harpies;[74] when a wood
    Of litters thick besiege the donor's gate,
    And begging lords and teeming ladies wait
    The promised dole; nay, some have learned the trick
    To beg for absent persons; feign them sick,
    Close mewed in their sedans, for fear of air;                      }
    And for their wives produce an empty chair.                        }
    This is my spouse; dispatch her with her share;                    }
    'Tis Galla.--Let her ladyship but peep.--
    No, sir, 'tis pity to disturb her sleep.[75]
      Such fine employments our whole days divide:
    The salutations of the morning tide
    Call up the sun; those ended, to the hall
    We wait the patron, hear the lawyers bawl;
    Then to the statues; where amidst the race                         }
    Of conquering Rome, some Arab shows his face,                      }
    Inscribed with titles, and profanes the place;[76]                 }
    Fit to be pissed against, and somewhat more.
    The great man, home conducted, shuts his door.
    Old clients, wearied out with fruitless care,
    Dismiss their hopes of eating, and despair;
    Though much against the grain, forced to retire,
    Buy roots for supper, and provide a fire.
      Meantime his lordship lolls within at ease,
    Pampering his paunch with foreign rarities;
    Both sea and land are ransacked for the feast,
    And his own gut the sole invited guest.
    Such plate, such tables, dishes dressed so well,
    That whole estates are swallowed at a meal.
    Even parasites are banished from his board;
    (At once a sordid and luxurious lord;)
    Prodigious throat, for which whole boars are drest;
    (A creature formed to furnish out a feast.)
    But present punishment pursues his maw,
    When, surfeited and swelled, the peacock raw
    He bears into the bath; whence want of breath,
    Repletions, apoplex, intestate death.
    His fate makes table-talk, divulged with scorn,
    And he, a jest, into his grave is borne.
      No age can go beyond us; future times
    Can add no farther to the present crimes.
    Our sons but the same things can wish and do;                      }
    Vice is at stand, and at the highest flow.                         }
    Then, Satire, spread thy sails, take all the winds can blow!       }
    Some may, perhaps, demand what muse can yield
    Sufficient strength for such a spacious field?
    From whence can be derived so large a vein,
    Bold truths to speak, and spoken to maintain,
    When godlike freedom is so far bereft
    The noble mind, that scarce the name is left?
    Ere _scandalum magnatum_ was begot,
    No matter if the great forgave or not;
    But if that honest licence now you take,                           }
    If into rogues omnipotent you rake,                                }
    Death is your doom, impaled upon a stake;                          }
    Smeared o'er with wax, and set on fire, to light
    The streets, and make a dreadful blaze by night.
      Shall they, who drenched three uncles in a draught
    Of poisonous juice, be then in triumph brought,
    Make lanes among the people where they go,                         }
    And, mounted high on downy chariots, throw                         }
    Disdainful glances on the crowd below?                             }
    Be silent, and beware, if such you see;
    'Tis defamation but to say, That's he!
    Against bold Turnus the great Trojan arm,
    Amidst their strokes the poet gets no harm:
    Achilles may in epic verse be slain,
    And none of all his myrmidons complain:
    Hylas may drop his pitcher, none will cry,
    Not if he drown himself for company;
    But when Lucilius brandishes his pen,
    And flashes in the face of guilty men,
    A cold sweat stands in drops on every part,
    And rage succeeds to tears, revenge to smart.[77]
    Muse, be advised; 'tis past considering time,
    When entered once the dangerous lists of rhime;
    Since none the living villains dare implead,
    Arraign them in the persons of the dead.




THE

THIRD SATIRE

OF

JUVENAL.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _The story of this satire speaks itself. Umbritius, the
      supposed friend of Juvenal, and himself a poet, is leaving
      Rome, and retiring to Cumæ. Our author accompanies him out
      of town. Before they take leave of each other, Umbritius
      tells his friend the reasons which oblige him to lead a
      private life, in an obscure place. He complains, that an
      honest man cannot get his bread at Rome; that none but
      flatterers make their fortunes there; that Grecians, and
      other foreigners, raise themselves by those sordid arts
      which he describes, and against which he bitterly inveighs.
      He reckons up the several inconveniences which arise from a
      city life, and the many dangers which attend it; upbraids
      the noblemen with covetousness, for not rewarding good
      poets; and arraigns the government for starving them.
      The great art of this satire is particularly shown in
      common-places; and drawing in as many vices, as could
      naturally fall into the compass of it._

    Grieved though I am an ancient friend to lose,                     }
    I like the solitary seat he chose,                                 }
    In quiet Cumæ[78] fixing his repose:                               }
    Where, far from noisy Rome, secure he lives,
    And one more citizen to Sybil gives;
    The road to Baiæ,[79] and that soft recess
    Which all the gods with all their bounty bless;
    Though I in Prochyta[80] with greater ease
    Could live, than in a street of palaces.
    What scene so desert, or so full of fright,                        }
    As towering houses, tumbling in the night,                         }
    And Rome on fire beheld by its own blazing light?                  }
    But worse than all the clattering tiles, and worse
    Than thousand padders, is the poet's curse;
    Rogues, that in dog-days cannot rhyme forbear,[81]
    But without mercy read, and make you hear.
      Now while my friend, just ready to depart,
    Was packing all his goods in one poor cart,
    He stopt a little at the Conduit-gate,
    Where Numa modelled once the Roman state,[82]
    In mighty councils with his nymph retired;[83]
    Though now the sacred shades and founts are hired
    By banished Jews, who their whole wealth can lay
    In a small basket, on a wisp of hay;[84]
    Yet such our avarice is, that every tree
    Pays for his head, nor sleep itself is free;
    Nor place, nor persons, now are sacred held,
    From their own grove the muses are expelled.
    Into this lonely vale our steps we bend,
    I and my sullen discontented friend;
    The marble caves and aqueducts we view;
    But how adulterate now, and different from the true!
    How much more beauteous had the fountain been
    Embellished with her first created green,
    Where crystal streams through living turf had run,
    Contented with an urn of native stone!
      Then thus Umbritius, with an angry frown,
    And looking back on this degenerate town:--
    Since noble arts in Rome have no support,
    And ragged virtue not a friend at court,
    No profit rises from the ungrateful stage,
    My poverty encreasing with my age;
    'Tis time to give my just disdain a vent,
    And, cursing, leave so base a government.
    Where Dædalus his borrowed wings laid by,[85]
    To that obscure retreat I chuse to fly:
    While yet few furrows on my face are seen,                         }
    While I walk upright, and old age is green,                        }
    And Lachesis has somewhat left to spin.[86]                        }
    Now, now 'tis time to quit this cursed place,
    And hide from villains my too honest face:
    Here let Arturius live,[87] and such as he;
    Such manners will with such a town agree.
    Knaves, who in full assemblies have the knack
    Of turning truth to lies, and white to black,
    Can hire large houses, and oppress the poor
    By farmed excise; can cleanse the common-shore,
    And rent the fishery; can bear the dead,                           }
    And teach their eyes dissembled tears to shed;                     }
    All this for gain; for gain they sell their very head.             }
    These fellows (see what fortune's power can do!)
    Were once the minstrels of a country show;
    Followed the prizes through each paltry town,
    By trumpet-cheeks and bloated faces known.
    But now, grown rich, on drunken holidays,
    At their own costs exhibit public plays;
    Where, influenced by the rabble's bloody will,
    With thumbs bent back, they popularly kill.[88]
    From thence returned, their sordid avarice rakes
    In excrements again, and hires the jakes.
    Why hire they not the town, not every thing,
    Since such as they have fortune in a string,
    Who, for her pleasure, can her fools advance,
    And toss them topmost on the wheel of chance?
    What's Rome to me, what business have I there?
    I who can neither lie, nor falsely swear?
    Nor praise my patron's undeserving rhymes,
    Nor yet comply with him, nor with his times?
    Unskilled in schemes by planets to foreshow,
    Like canting rascals, how the wars will go:
    I neither will, nor can, prognosticate
    To the young gaping heir, his father's fate;
    Nor in the entrails of a toad have pried,
    Nor carried bawdy presents to a bride:
    For want of these town-virtues, thus alone
    I go, conducted on my way by none;
    Like a dead member from the body rent,
    Maimed, and unuseful to the government.
    Who now is loved, but he who loves the times,
    Conscious of close intrigues, and dipt in crimes,
    Labouring with secrets which his bosom burn,
    Yet never must to public light return?
    They get reward alone, who can betray;
    For keeping honest counsels none will pay.
    He who can Verres[89] when he will accuse,
    The purse of Verres may at pleasure use:
    But let not all the gold which Tagus hides,
    And pays the sea in tributary tides,[90]
    Be bribe sufficient to corrupt thy breast,
    Or violate with dreams thy peaceful rest.
    Great men with jealous eyes the friend behold,
    Whose secrecy they purchase with their gold.
      I haste to tell thee,--nor shall shame oppose,--
    What confidents our wealthy Romans chose;
    And whom I must abhor: to speak my mind,
    I hate, in Rome, a Grecian town to find;
    To see the scum of Greece transplanted here,
    Received like gods, is what I cannot bear.
    Nor Greeks alone, but Syrians here abound;
    Obscene Orontes,[91] diving under ground,
    Conveys his wealth to Tyber's hungry shores,
    And fattens Italy with foreign whores:
    Hither their crooked harps and customs come;
    All find receipt in hospitable Rome.
    The barbarous harlots crowd the public place:--                    }
    Go, fools, and purchase an unclean embrace;                        }
    The painted mitre court, and the more painted face.                }
    Old Romulus,[92] and father Mars, look down!                       }
    Your herdsman primitive, your homely clown,                        }
    Is turned a beau in a loose tawdry gown.                           }
    His once unkem'd and horrid locks, behold
    'Stilling sweet oil; his neck enchained with gold;
    Aping the foreigners in every dress,
    Which, bought at greater cost, becomes him less.
    Meantime they wisely leave their native land;
    From Sycion, Samos, and from Alaband,
    And Amydon, to Rome they swarm in shoals:
    So sweet and easy is the gain from fools.
    Poor refugees at first, they purchase here;
    And, soon as denizened, they domineer;
    Grow to the great, a flattering, servile rout,
    Work themselves inward, and their patrons out.
    Quick-witted, brazen-faced, with fluent tongues,
    Patient of labours, and dissembling wrongs.
    Riddle me this, and guess him if you can,
    Who bears a nation in a single man?
    A cook, a conjurer, a rhetorician,                                 }
    A painter, pedant, a geometrician,                                 }
    A dancer on the ropes, and a physician;                            }
    All things the hungry Greek exactly knows,
    And bid him go to heaven, to heaven he goes.
    In short, no Scythian, Moor, or Thracian born,
    But in that town which arms and arts adorn.[93]
    Shall he be placed above me at the board,
    In purple clothed, and lolling like a lord?
    Shall he before me sign, whom t'other day                          }
    A small-craft vessel hither did convey,                            }
    Where, stowed with prunes, and rotten figs, he lay?                }
    How little is the privilege become
    Of being born a citizen of Rome!
    The Greeks get all by fulsome flatteries;
    A most peculiar stroke they have at lies.
    They make a wit of their insipid friend,
    His blubber-lips and beetle-brows commend,
    His long crane-neck and narrow shoulders praise,--
    You'd think they were describing Hercules.
    A creaking voice for a clear treble goes;
    Though harsher than a cock, that treads and crows.
    We can as grossly praise; but, to our grief,
    No flattery but from Grecians gains belief.
    Besides these qualities, we must agree,
    They mimic better on the stage than we:
    The wife, the whore, the shepherdess, they play,
    In such a free, and such a graceful way,
    That we believe a very woman shown,
    And fancy something underneath the gown.
    But not Antiochus, nor Stratocles,[94]                             }
    Our ears and ravished eyes can only please;                        }
    The nation is composed of such as these.                           }
    All Greece is one comedian; laugh, and they
    Return it louder than an ass can bray;
    Grieve, and they grieve; if you weep silently,                     }
    There seems a silent echo in their eye;                            }
    They cannot mourn like you, but they can cry.                      }
    Call for a fire, their winter clothes they take;
    Begin but you to shiver, and they shake;
    In frost and snow, if you complain of heat,
    They rub the unsweating brow, and swear they sweat.
    We live not on the square with such as these;
    Such are our betters who can better please;
    Who day and night are like a looking-glass,
    Still ready to reflect their patron's face;
    The panegyric hand, and lifted eye,
    Prepared for some new piece of flattery.
    Even nastiness occasions will afford;
    They praise a belching, or well-pissing lord.
    Besides, there's nothing sacred, nothing free
    From bold attempts of their rank lechery.
    Through the whole family their labours run;                        }
    The daughter is debauched, the wife is won;                        }
    Nor 'scapes the bridegroom, or the blooming son.                   }
    If none they find for their lewd purpose fit,
    They with the walls and very floors commit.
    They search the secrets of the house, and so
    Are worshipped there, and feared for what they know.
      And, now we talk of Grecians, cast a view                        }
    On what, in schools, their men of morals do.                       }
    A rigid stoick his own pupil slew;                                 }
    A friend, against a friend of his own cloth,
    Turned evidence, and murdered on his oath.[95]
    What room is left for Romans in a town
    Where Grecians rule, and cloaks controul the gown?
    Some Diphilus, or some Protogenes,[96]
    Look sharply out, our senators to seize;
    Engross them wholly, by their native art,
    And fear no rivals in their bubbles' heart:
    One drop of poison in my patron's ear,
    One slight suggestion of a senseless fear,
    Infused with cunning, serves to ruin me;
    Disgraced, and banished from the family.
    In vain forgotten services I boast;
    My long dependence in an hour is lost.
    Look round the world, what country will appear,
    Where friends are left with greater ease than here?
    At Rome (nor think me partial to the poor)
    All offices of ours are out of door:
    In vain we rise, and to the levees run;
    My lord himself is up before, and gone:
    The prætor bids his lictors mend their pace,
    Lest his colleague outstrip him in the race.
    The childless matrons are, long since, awake,
    And for affronts the tardy visits take.
      'Tis frequent here to see a free-born son
    On the left hand of a rich hireling run;
    Because the wealthy rogue can throw away,
    For half a brace of bouts, a tribune's pay;
    But you, poor sinner, though you love the vice,
    And like the whore, demur upon the price;
    And, frighted with the wicked sum, forbear
    To lend a hand, and help her from the chair.
      Produce a witness of unblemished life,
    Holy as Numa, or as Numa's wife,
    Or him who bid the unhallowed flames retire,
    And snatched the trembling goddess from the fire;[97]
    The question is not put how far extends
    His piety, but what he yearly spends;
    Quick, to the business; how he lives and eats;
    How largely gives; how splendidly he treats;
    How many thousand acres feed his sheep;
    What are his rents; what servants does he keep?
    The account is soon cast up; the judges rate
    Our credit in the court by our estate.
    Swear by our gods, or those the Greeks adore,
    Thou art as sure forsworn, as thou art poor:
    The poor must gain their bread by perjury;                         }
    And e'en the gods, that other means deny,                          }
    In conscience must absolve them, when they lie.                    }
      Add, that the rich have still a gibe in store,
    And will be monstrous witty on the poor;
    For the torn surtout and the tattered vest,
    The wretch and all his wardrobe, are a jest;
    The greasy gown, sullied with often turning,
    Gives a good hint, to say,--The man's in mourning;
    Or, if the shoe be ripped, or patches put,--
    He's wounded! see the plaister on his foot.
    Want is the scorn of every wealthy fool,
    And wit in rags is turned to ridicule.
    Pack hence, and from the covered benches rise,
    (The master of the ceremonies cries,)
    This is no place for you, whose small estate
    Is not the value of the settled rate;
    The sons of happy punks, the pandar's heir,                        }
    Are privileged to sit in triumph there,                            }
    To clap the first, and rule the theatre.                           }
    Up to the galleries, for shame, retreat;
    For, by the Roscian law,[98] the poor can claim no seat.--
    Who ever brought to his rich daughter's bed,
    The man that polled but twelve pence for his head?
    Who ever named a poor man for his heir,
    Or called him to assist the judging chair?
    The poor were wise, who, by the rich oppressed,
    Withdrew, and sought a secret place of rest.[99]
    Once they did well, to free themselves from scorn;
    But had done better, never to return.
    Rarely they rise by virtue's aid, who lie
    Plunged in the depth of helpless poverty.
    At Rome 'tis worse, where house-rent by the year,                  }
    And servants' bellies, cost so devilish dear,                      }
    And tavern-bills run high for hungry cheer.                        }
    To drink or eat in earthen-ware we scorn,                          }
    Which cheaply country-cupboards does adorn,                        }
    And coarse blue hoods on holidays are worn.                        }
    Some distant parts of Italy are known,
    Where none but only dead men wear a gown;[100]
    On theatres of turf, in homely state,
    Old plays they act, old feasts they celebrate;
    The same rude song returns upon the crowd,
    And, by tradition, is for wit allowed.
    The mimic yearly gives the same delights;
    And in the mother's arms the clownish infant frights.
    Their habits (undistinguished by degree)                           }
    Are plain, alike; the same simplicity,                             }
    Both on the stage, and in the pit, you see.                        }
    In his white cloak the magistrate appears;
    The country bumpkin the same livery wears.
    But here attired beyond our purse we go,
    For useless ornament and flaunting show;
    We take on trust, in purple robes to shine,
    And poor, are yet ambitious to be fine.
    This is a common vice, though all things here
    Are sold, and sold unconscionably dear.
    What will you give that Cossus[101] may but view
    Your face, and in the crowd distinguish you;
    May take your incense like a gracious God,
    And answer only with a civil nod?
    To please our patrons, in this vicious age,
    We make our entrance by the favourite page;
    Shave his first down, and when he polls his hair,
    The consecrated locks to temples bear;
    Pay tributary cracknels, which he sells,
    And with our offerings help to raise his vails.
      Who fears in country-towns a house's fall,
    Or to be caught betwixt a riven wall?
    But we inhabit a weak city here,
    Which buttresses and props but scarcely bear;
    And 'tis the village-mason's daily calling,
    To keep the world's metropolis from falling,
    To cleanse the gutters, and the chinks to close,
    And, for one night, secure his lord's repose.
    At Cumæ we can sleep quite round the year,
    Nor falls, nor fires, nor nightly dangers fear;
    While rolling flames from Roman turrets fly,
    And the pale citizens for buckets cry.
    Thy neighbour has removed his wretched store,
    Few hands will rid the lumber of the poor;
    Thy own third story smokes, while thou, supine,
    Art drenched in fumes of undigested wine.
    For if the lowest floors already burn,
    Cock-lofts and garrets soon will take the turn,
    Where thy tame pigeons next the tiles were bred,[102]
    Which, in their nests unsafe, are timely fled.
      Codrus[103] had but one bed, so short to boot,
    That his short wife's short legs hung dangling out;
    His cupboard's head six earthen pitchers graced,
    Beneath them was his trusty tankard placed;
    And, to support this noble plate, there lay
    A bending Chiron cast from honest clay;
    His few Greek books a rotten chest contained,
    Whose covers much of mouldiness complained;
    Where mice and rats devoured poetic bread,
    And with heroic verse luxuriously were fed.
    'Tis true, poor Codrus nothing had to boast,
    And yet poor Codrus all that nothing lost;
    Begged naked through the streets of wealthy Rome,
    And found not one to feed, or take him home.
      But, if the palace of Arturius burn,
    The nobles change their clothes, the matrons mourn;
    The city-prætor will no pleadings hear;                            }
    The very name of fire we hate and fear,                            }
    And look aghast, as if the Gauls were here.                        }
    While yet it burns, the officious nation flies,
    Some to condole, and some to bring supplies.
    One sends him marble to rebuild, and one
    White naked statues of the Parian stone,
    The work of Polyclete, that seem to live;
    While others images for altars give;
    One books and skreens, and Pallas to the breast;
    Another bags of gold, and he gives best.
    Childless Arturius, vastly rich before,
    Thus, by his losses, multiplies his store;
    Suspected for accomplice to the fire,
    That burnt his palace but to build it higher.
      But, could you be content to bid adieu
    To the dear playhouse, and the players too,
    Sweet country-seats are purchased every where,                     }
    With lands and gardens, at less price than here                    }
    You hire a darksome dog-hole by the year.                          }
    A small convenience decently prepared,
    A shallow well, that rises in your yard,
    That spreads his easy crystal streams around,
    And waters all the pretty spot of ground.
    There, love the fork, thy garden cultivate,
    And give thy frugal friends a Pythagorean treat;[104]
    'Tis somewhat to be lord of some small ground,
    In which a lizard may, at least, turn round.
      'Tis frequent here, for want of sleep, to die,                   }
    Which fumes of undigested feasts deny,                             }
    And, with imperfect heat, in languid stomachs fry.                 }
    What house secure from noise the poor can keep,
    When even the rich can scarce afford to sleep?
    So dear it costs to purchase rest in Rome,
    And hence the sources of diseases come.
    The drover, who his fellow-drover meets
    In narrow passages of winding streets;
    The waggoners, that curse their standing teams,
    Would wake even drowsy Drusus from his dreams.
    And yet the wealthy will not brook delay,
    But sweep above our heads, and make their way,
    In lofty litters borne, and read and write,
    Or sleep at ease, the shutters make it night;
    Yet still he reaches first the public place.
    The press before him stops the client's pace;
    The crowd that follows crush his panting sides,
    And trip his heels; he walks not, but he rides.
    One elbows him, one jostles in the shole,
    A rafter breaks his head, or chairman's pole;
    Stocking'd with loads of fat town-dirt he goes,                    }
    And some rogue-soldier, with his hob-nailed shoes,                 }
    Indents his legs behind in bloody rows.                            }
      See, with what smoke our doles we celebrate:                     }
    A hundred guests, invited, walk in state;                          }
    A hundred hungry slaves, with their Dutch kitchens, wait.          }
    Huge pans the wretches on their heads must bear,
    Which scarce gigantic Corbulo[105] could rear;
    Yet they must walk upright beneath the load,
    Nay run, and, running, blow the sparkling flames abroad.
    Their coats, from botching newly brought, are torn.
    Unwieldy timber-trees, in waggons borne,
    Stretched at their length, beyond their carriage lie,
    That nod, and threaten ruin from on high;
    For, should their axle break, its overthrow                        }
    Would crush, and pound to dust, the crowd below;                   }
    Nor friends their friends, nor sires their sons could know;        }
    Nor limbs, nor bones, nor carcase, would remain,
    But a mashed heap, a hotchpotch of the slain;
    One vast destruction; not the soul alone,
    But bodies, like the soul, invisible are flown.
    Meantime, unknowing of their fellow's fate,
    The servants wash the platter, scower the plate,
    Then blow the fire, with puffing cheeks, and lay                   }
    The rubbers, and the bathing-sheets display,                       }
    And oil them first; and each is handy in his way.                  }
    But he, for whom this busy care they take,
    Poor ghost! is wandering by the Stygian lake;
    Affrighted with the ferryman's grim face,
    New to the horrors of that uncouth place,
    His passage begs, with unregarded prayer,
    And wants two farthings to discharge his fare.
      Return we to the dangers of the night.--
    And, first, behold our houses' dreadful height;
    From whence come broken potsherds tumbling down,                   }
    And leaky ware from garret-windows thrown;                         }
    Well may they break our heads, that mark the flinty stone.         }
    'Tis want of sense to sup abroad too late,
    Unless thou first hast settled thy estate;
    As many fates attend thy steps to meet,
    As there are waking windows in the street.
    Bless the good Gods, and think thy chance is rare,
    To have a piss-pot only for thy share.
    The scouring drunkard, if he does not fight
    Before his bed-time, takes no rest that night;
    Passing the tedious hours in greater pain
    Than stern Achilles, when his friend was slain;
    'Tis so ridiculous, but so true withal,
    A bully cannot sleep without a brawl.
    Yet, though his youthful blood be fired with wine,
    He wants not wit the danger to decline;
    Is cautious to avoid the coach and six,
    And on the lacquies will no quarrel fix.
    His train of flambeaux, and embroidered coat,
    May privilege my lord to walk secure on foot;
    But me, who must by moon-light homeward bend,
    Or lighted only with a candle's end,
    Poor me he fights, if that be fighting, where
    He only cudgels, and I only bear.
    He stands, and bids me stand; I must abide,
    For he's the stronger, and is drunk beside.
      Where did you whet your knife to-night, he cries,
    And shred the leeks that in your stomach rise?
    Whose windy beans have stuft your guts, and where
    Have your black thumbs been dipt in vinegar?
    With what companion-cobler have you fed,
    On old ox-cheeks, or he-goat's tougher head?
    What, are you dumb? Quick, with your answer, quick,
    Before my foot salutes you with a kick.
    Say, in what nasty cellar, under ground,
    Or what church-porch, your rogueship may be found?--
    Answer, or answer not, 'tis all the same,
    He lays me on, and makes me bear the blame.
    Before the bar for beating him you come;
    This is a poor man's liberty in Rome.
    You beg his pardon; happy to retreat
    With some remaining teeth, to chew your meat.
      Nor is this all; for when, retired, you think
    To sleep securely, when the candles wink,
    When every door with iron chains is barred,
    And roaring taverns are no longer heard;
    The ruffian robbers, by no justice awed,
    And unpaid cut-throat soldiers, are abroad;
    Those venal souls, who, hardened in each ill,
    To save complaints and prosecution, kill.
    Chased from their woods and bogs, the padders come                 }
    To this vast city, as their native home,                           }
    To live at ease, and safely skulk in Rome.                         }
      The forge in fetters only is employed;
    Our iron mines exhausted and destroyed
    In shackles; for these villains scarce allow
    Goads for the teams, and plough-shares for the plough.
    Oh, happy ages of our ancestors,
    Beneath the kings and tribunitial powers!
    One jail did all their criminals restrain,
    Which now the walls of Rome can scarce contain.
      More I could say, more causes I could show
    For my departure, but the sun is low;
    The waggoner grows weary of my stay,
    And whips his horses forwards on their way.
    Farewell! and when, like me, o'erwhelmed with care,                }
    You to your own Aquinam[106] shall repair,                         }
    To take a mouthful of sweet country air,                           }
    Be mindful of your friend; and send me word,
    What joys your fountains and cool shades afford.
    Then, to assist your satires, I will come,
    And add new venom when you write of Rome.




THE

SIXTH SATIRE

OF

JUVENAL.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _This Satire, of almost double length to any of the rest, is
      a bitter invective against the fair sex. It is, indeed, a
      common-place, from whence all the moderns have notoriously
      stolen their sharpest railleries. In his other satires,
      the poet has only glanced on some particular women, and
      generally scourged the men; but this he reserved wholly for
      the ladies. How they had offended him, I know not; but,
      upon the whole matter, he is not to be excused for imputing
      to all, the vices of some few amongst them. Neither was
      it generously done of him, to attack the weakest, as well
      as the fairest, part of the creation; neither do I know
      what moral he could reasonably draw from it. It could not
      be to avoid the whole sex, if all had been true which he
      alleges against them; for that had been to put an end to
      human kind. And to bid us beware of their artifices, is
      a kind of silent acknowledgment, that they have more wit
      than men; which turns the satire upon us, and particularly
      upon the poet, who thereby makes a compliment, where he
      meant a libel. If he intended only to exercise his wit, he
      has forfeited his judgment, by making the one half of his
      readers his mortal enemies; and amongst the men, all the
      happy lovers, by their own experience, will disprove his
      accusations. The whole world must allow this to be the
      wittiest of his satires; and truly he had need of all his
      parts, to maintain, with so much violence, so unjust a
      charge. I am satisfied he will bring but few over to his
      opinion; and on that consideration chiefly I ventured to
      trans late him. Though there wanted not another reason,
      which was, that no one else would undertake it; at
      least, Sir C. S., who could have done more right to the
      author, after a long delay, at length absolutely refused
      so ungrateful an employment; and every one will grant,
      that the work must have been imperfect and lame, if it had
      appeared without one of the principal members belonging
      to it. Let the poet, therefore, bear the blame of his own
      invention; and let me satisfy the world, that I am not of
      his opinion. Whatever his Roman ladies were, the English
      are free from all his imputations. They will read with
      wonder and abhorrence the vices of an age, which was the
      most infamous of any on record. They will bless themselves
      when they behold those examples, related of Domitian's
      time; they will give back to antiquity those monsters it
      produced, and believe, with reason, that the species of
      those women is extinguished, or, at least, that they were
      never here propagated. I may safely, therefore, proceed
      to the argument of a satire, which is no way relating to
      them; and first observe, that my author makes their lust
      the most heroic of their vices; the rest are in a manner
      but digression. He skims them over, but he dwells on this;
      when he seems to have taken his last leave of it, on the
      sudden he returns to it: It is one branch of it in Hippia,
      another in Messalina, but lust is the main body of the tree.
      He begins with this text in the first line, and takes it
      up, with intermissions, to the end of the chapter. Every
      vice is a loader, but that is a ten. The fillers, or
      intermediate parts, are--their revenge; their contrivances
      of secret crimes; their arts to hide them; their wit to
      excuse them; and their impudence to own them, when they can
      no longer be kept secret. Then the persons to whom they
      are most addicted, and on whom they commonly bestow the
      last favours, as stage-players, fiddlers, singing-boys, and
      fencers. Those who pass for chaste amongst them, are not
      really so; but only, for their vast doweries, are rather
      suffered, than loved, by their own husbands. That they are
      imperious, domineering, scolding wives; set up for learning,
      and criticism in poetry; but are false judges: Love to
      speak Greek, (which was then the fashionable tongue, as
      French is now with us). That they plead causes at the bar,
      and play prizes at the bear-garden: That they are gossips
      and newsmongers; wrangle with their neighbours abroad,
      and beat their servants at home: That they lie-in for new
      faces once a month; are sluttish with their husbands in
      private, and paint and dress in public for their lovers: That
      they deal with Jews, diviners, and fortune-tellers; learn
      the arts of miscarrying and barrenness; buy children, and
      produce them for their own; murder their husbands' sons,
      if they stand in their way to his estate, and make their
      adulterers his heirs. From hence the poet proceeds to show
      the occasions of all these vices, their original, and how
      they were introduced in Rome by peace, wealth, and luxury.
      In conclusion, if we will take the word of our malicious
      author, bad women are the general standing rule; and the
      good, but some few exceptions to it._

    In Saturn's reign, at Nature's early birth,
    There was that thing called Chastity on earth;
    When in a narrow cave, their common shade,
    The sheep, the shepherds, and their gods were laid;
    When reeds, and leaves, and hides of beasts, were spread,          }
    By mountain-housewives, for their homely bed,                      }
    And mossy pillows raised, for the rude husband's head.             }
    Unlike the niceness of our modern dames,
    (Affected nymphs, with new-affected names,)
    The Cynthias, and the Lesbias of our years,
    Who for a sparrow's death dissolve in tears,
    Those first unpolished matrons, big and bold,
    Gave suck to infants of gigantic mould;
    Rough as their savage lords, who ranged the wood,
    And, fat with acorns, belched their windy food.
    For when the world was buxom, fresh, and young,
    Her sons were undebauched, and therefore strong;
    And whether born in kindly beds of earth,
    Or struggling from the teeming oaks to birth,
    Or from what other atoms they begun,
    No sires they had, or, if a sire, the sun.
    Some thin remains of chastity appeared
    Even under Jove,[107] but Jove without a beard;
    Before the servile Greeks had learnt to swear
    By heads of kings; while yet the bounteous year
    Her common fruits in open plains exposed;
    Ere thieves were feared, or gardens were inclosed.
    At length uneasy Justice upwards flew,
    And both the sisters to the stars withdrew;[108]
    From that old æra whoring did begin,
    So venerably ancient is the sin.
    Adulterers next invade the nuptial state,
    And marriage-beds creaked with a foreign weight;
    All other ills did iron times adorn,
    But whores and silver in one age were born.
    Yet thou, they say, for marriage dost provide;
    Is this an age to buckle with a bride?
    They say thy hair the curling art is taught,
    The wedding-ring perhaps already bought;
    A sober man like thee to change his life!
    What fury would possess thee with a wife?
    Art thou of every other death bereft,
    No knife, no ratsbane, no kind halter left?
    (For every noose compared to her's is cheap.)
    Is there no city-bridge from whence to leap?
    Would'st thou become her drudge, who dost enjoy
    A better sort of bedfellow, thy boy?
    He keeps thee not awake with nightly brawls,
    Nor, with a begged reward, thy pleasure palls;
    Nor, with insatiate heavings, calls for more,
    When all thy spirits were drained out before.
    But still Ursidius courts the marriage-bait,
    Longs for a son to settle his estate,
    And takes no gifts, though every gaping heir
    Would gladly grease the rich old bachelor.
    What revolution can appear so strange,
    As such a lecher such a life to change?
    A rank, notorious whoremaster, to choose
    To thrust his neck into the marriage-noose?
    He who so often, in a dreadful fright,
    Had, in a coffer, 'scaped the jealous cuckold's sight;
    That he, to wedlock dotingly betrayed,
    Should hope, in this lewd town, to find a maid!--
    The man's grown mad! to ease his frantic pain,
    Run for the surgeon, breathe the middle vein;
    But let a heifer, with gilt horns, be led
    To Juno, regent of the marriage-bed;
    And let him every deity adore,                                     }
    If his new bride prove not an arrant whore,                        }
    In head, and tail, and every other pore.                           }
    On Ceres' feast,[109] restrained from their delight,
    Few matrons there, but curse the tedious night;
    Few whom their fathers dare salute, such lust
    Their kisses have, and come with such a gust.
    With ivy now adorn thy doors, and wed;
    Such is thy bride, and such thy genial bed.
    Think'st thou one man is for one woman meant?
    She sooner with one eye would be content.
      And yet, 'tis noised, a maid did once appear
    In some small village, though fame says not where.
    'Tis possible; but sure no man she found;
    'Twas desart all about her father's ground.
    And yet some lustful God might there make bold;
    Are Jove and Mars grown impotent and old?
    Many a fair nymph has in a cave been spread,
    And much good love without a feather-bed.
    Whither would'st thou, to chuse a wife, resort,
    The park, the mall, the playhouse, or the court?
    Which way soever thy adventures fall,
    Secure alike of chastity in all.
      One sees a dancing-master capering high,
    And raves, and pisses, with pure extacy;
    Another does with all his motions move,
    And gapes, and grins, as in the feat of love;
    A third is charmed with the new opera notes,
    Admires the song, but on the singer dotes.
    The country lady in the box appears,                               }
    Softly she warbles over all she hears,                             }
    And sucks in passion both at eyes and ears.                        }
      The rest (when now the long vacation's come,
    The noisy hall and theatres grown dumb)
    Their memories to refresh, and cheer their hearts,
    In borrowed breeches, act the players' parts.
    The poor, that scarce have wherewithal to eat,
    Will pinch, to make the singing-boy a treat;
    The rich, to buy him, will refuse no price,
    And stretch his quail-pipe, till they crack his voice.
    Tragedians, acting love, for lust are sought,
    Though but the parrots of a poet's thought.
    The pleading lawyer, though for counsel used,
    In chamber-practice often is refused.
    Still thou wilt have a wife, and father heirs,
    The product of concurring theatres.
    Perhaps a fencer did thy brows adorn,
    And a young swordsman to thy lands is born.
      Thus Hippia loathed her old patrician lord,
    And left him for a brother of the sword.
    To wondering Pharos[110] with her love she fled,
    To show one monster more than Afric bred;
    Forgetting house and husband left behind,                          }
    Even children too, she sails before the wind;                      }
    False to them all, but constant to her kind.                       }
    But, stranger yet, and harder to conceive,
    She could the playhouse and the players leave.
    Born of rich parentage, and nicely bred,
    She lodged on down, and in a damask bed;
    Yet daring now the dangers of the deep,
    On a hard mattress is content to sleep.
    Ere this, 'tis true, she did her fame expose;
    But that great ladies with great ease can lose.
    The tender nymph could the rude ocean bear,
    So much her lust was stronger than her fear.
    But had some honest cause her passage prest,
    The smallest hardship had disturbed her breast.
    Each inconvenience makes their virtue cold;
    But womankind in ills is ever bold.
    Were she to follow her own lord to sea,
    What doubts and scruples would she raise to stay?
    Her stomach sick, and her head giddy grows,
    The tar and pitch are nauseous to her nose;
    But in love's voyage nothing can offend,
    Women are never sea-sick with a friend.
    Amidst the crew she walks upon the board,                          }
    She eats, she drinks, she handles every cord;                      }
    And if she spews, 'tis thinking of her lord.                       }
    Now ask, for whom her friends and fame she lost?
    What youth, what beauty, could the adulterer boast?
    What was the face, for which she could sustain
    To be called mistress to so base a man?
    The gallant of his days had known the best;                        }
    Deep scars were seen indented on his breast,                       }
    And all his battered limbs required their needful rest;            }
    A promontory wen, with grisly grace,
    Stood high upon the handle of his face:
    His blear-eyes ran in gutters to his chin;
    His beard was stubble, and his cheeks were thin.
    But 'twas his fencing did her fancy move;
    'Tis arms, and blood, and cruelty, they love.
    But should he quit his trade, and sheath his sword,
    Her lover would begin to be her lord.
      This was a private crime; but you shall hear
    What fruits the sacred brows of monarchs bear:[111]
    The good old sluggard but began to snore,
    When, from his side, up rose the imperial whore;
    She, who preferred the pleasures of the night
    To pomps, that are but impotent delight,
    Strode from the palace, with an eager pace,
    To cope with a more masculine embrace.
    Muffled she marched, like Juno in a cloud,
    Of all her train but one poor wench allowed;
    One whom in secret-service she could trust,
    The rival and companion of her lust.
    To the known brothel-house she takes her way,                      }
    And for a nasty room gives double pay;                             }
    That room in which the rankest harlot lay.                         }
    Prepared for fight, expectingly she lies,
    With heaving breasts, and with desiring eyes.
    Still as one drops, another takes his place,
    And, baffled, still succeeds to like disgrace.
    At length, when friendly darkness is expired,
    And every strumpet from her cell retired,
    She lags behind and, lingering at the gate,
    With a repining sigh submits to fate;
    All filth without, and all a fire within,
    Tired with the toil, unsated with the sin.
    Old Cæsar's bed the modest matron seeks,
    The steam of lamps still hanging on her cheeks
    In ropy smut; thus foul, and thus bedight,
    She brings him back the product of the night.
      Now, should I sing what poisons they provide,
    With all their trumpery of charms beside,
    And all their arts of death,--it would be known,
    Lust is the smallest sin the sex can own.
    Cæsinia still, they say, is guiltless found                        }
    Of every vice, by her own lord renowned;                           }
    And well she may, she brought ten thousand pound.                  }
    She brought him wherewithal to be called chaste;
    His tongue is tied in golden fetters fast:
    He sighs, adores, and courts her every hour;
    Who would not do as much for such a dower?
    She writes love-letters to the youth in grace,
    Nay, tips the wink before the cuckold's face;
    And might do more, her portion makes it good;
    Wealth has the privilege of widowhood.[112]
      These truths with his example you disprove,
    Who with his wife is monstrously in love:
    But know him better; for I heard him swear,
    'Tis not that she's his wife, but that she's fair.
    Let her but have three wrinkles in her face,
    Let her eyes lessen, and her skin unbrace,
    Soon you will hear the saucy steward say,--
    Pack up with all your trinkets, and away;
    You grow offensive both at bed and board;
    Your betters must be had to please my lord.
      Meantime she's absolute upon the throne,
    And, knowing time is precious, loses none.
    She must have flocks of sheep, with wool more fine
    Than silk, and vineyards of the noblest wine;
    Whole droves of pages for her train she craves,
    And sweeps the prisons for attending slaves.
    In short, whatever in her eyes can come,
    Or others have abroad, she wants at home.
    When winter shuts the seas, and fleecy snows
    Make houses white, she to the merchant goes;
    Rich crystals of the rock she takes up there,
    Huge agate vases, and old china ware;
    Then Berenice's ring[113] her finger proves,
    More precious made by her incestuous loves,
    And infamously dear; a brother's bribe,
    Even God's anointed, and of Judah's tribe;
    Where barefoot they approach the sacred shrine,
    And think it only sin to feed on swine.
      But is none worthy to be made a wife                             }
    In all this town? Suppose her free from strife,                    }
    Rich, fair, and fruitful, of unblemished life;                     }
    Chaste as the Sabines, whose prevailing charms,
    Dismissed their husbands' and their brothers' arms;
    Grant her, besides, of noble blood, that ran
    In ancient veins, ere heraldry began;
    Suppose all these, and take a poet's word,
    A black swan is not half so rare a bird.
    A wife, so hung with virtues, such a freight,
    What mortal shoulders could support the weight!
    Some country girl, scarce to a curtsey bred,
    Would I much rather than Cornelia[114] wed;
    If supercilious, haughty, proud, and vain,
    She brought her father's triumphs in her train.
    Away with all your Carthaginian state;                             }
    Let vanquished Hannibal without doors wait,                        }
    Too burly, and too big, to pass my narrow gate.                    }
      O Pæan! cries Amphion,[115] bend thy bow                         }
    Against my wife, and let my children go!--                         }
    But sullen Pæan shoots at sons and mothers too.                    }
    His Niobe and all his boys he lost;
    Even her, who did her numerous offspring boast,
    As fair and fruitful as the sow that carried
    The thirty pigs, at one large litter farrowed.[116]
      What beauty, or what chastity, can bear
    So great a price, if, stately and severe,
    She still insults, and you must still adore?
    Grant that the honey's much, the gall is more.
    Upbraided with the virtues she displays,
    Seven hours in twelve you loath the wife you praise.
    Some faults, though small, intolerable grow;
    For what so nauseous and affected too,
    As those that think they due perfection want,
    Who have not learnt to lisp the Grecian cant?[117]
    In Greece, their whole accomplishments they seek:
    Their fashion, breeding, language, must be Greek;
    But, raw in all that does to Rome belong,
    They scorn to cultivate their mother-tongue.
    In Greek they flatter, all their fears they speak;
    Tell all their secrets; nay, they scold in Greek:
    Even in the feat of love, they use that tongue.
    Such affectations may become the young;
    But thou, old hag, of three score years and three,
    Is showing of thy parts in Greek for thee?
    #Zôê kai psychê!# All those tender words
    The momentary trembling bliss affords;
    The kind soft murmurs of the private sheets
    Are bawdy, while thou speak'st in public streets.
    Those words have fingers; and their force is such,
    They raise the dead, and mount him with a touch.
    But all provocatives from thee are vain;
    No blandishment the slackened nerve can strain.
      If then thy lawful spouse thou canst not love,
    What reason should thy mind to marriage move?
    Why all the charges of the nuptial feast,
    Wine and deserts, and sweet-meats to digest?
    The endowing gold that buys the dear delight,
    Given for thy first and only happy night?
    If thou art thus uxoriously inclined,
    To bear thy bondage with a willing mind,
    Prepare thy neck, and put it in the yoke;
    But for no mercy from thy woman look.
    For though, perhaps, she loves with equal fires,
    To absolute dominion she aspires,
    Joys in the spoils, and triumphs o'er thy purse;
    The better husband makes the wife the worse.
    Nothing is thine to give, or sell, or buy,                         }
    All offices of ancient friendship die,                             }
    Nor hast thou leave to make a legacy.[118]                         }
    By thy imperious wife thou art bereft
    A privilege, to pimps and panders left;
    Thy testament's her will; where she prefers                        }
    Her ruffians, drudges, and adulterers,                             }
    Adopting all thy rivals for thy heirs.                             }
      Go drag that slave to death!--Your reason? why
    Should the poor innocent be doomed to die?
    What proofs? For, when man's life is in debate,
    The judge can ne'er too long deliberate.--
    Call'st thou that slave a man? the wife replies;
    Proved, or unproved, the crime, the villain dies.
    I have the sovereign power to save, or kill,
    And give no other reason but my will.--
      Thus the she-tyrant reigns, till, pleased with change,
    Her wild affections to new empires range;
    Another subject-husband she desires;
    Divorced from him, she to the first retires,
    While the last wedding-feast is scarcely o'er,
    And garlands hang yet green upon the door.
    So still the reckoning rises; and appears
    In total sum, eight husbands in five years.
    The title for a tomb-stone might be fit,
    But that it would too commonly be writ.
      Her mother living, hope no quiet day;                            }
    She sharpens her, instructs her how to flay                        }
    Her husband bare, and then divides the prey.                       }
    She takes love-letters, with a crafty smile,
    And, in her daughter's answer, mends the style.
    In vain the husband sets his watchful spies;
    She cheats their cunning, or she bribes their eyes.
    The doctor's called; the daughter, taught the trick,
    Pretends to faint, and in full health is sick.
    The panting stallion, at the closet-door,
    Hears the consult, and wishes it were o'er.
    Canst thou, in reason, hope, a bawd so known,
    Should teach her other manners than her own?
    Her interest is in all the advice she gives;
    'Tis on the daughter's rents the mother lives.
      No cause is tried at the litigious bar,
    But women plaintiffs or defendants are;
    They form the process, all the briefs they write,                  }
    The topics furnish, and the pleas indict,                          }
    And teach the toothless lawyer how to bite.                        }
      They turn viragos too; the wrestler's toil
    They try, and smear the naked limbs with oil;
    Against the post their wicker shields they crush,
    Flourish the sword, and at the flastron push.
    Of every exercise the mannish crew
    Fulfils the parts, and oft excels us too;
    Prepared not only in feigned fights to engage,
    But rout the gladiators on the stage.
    What sense of shame in such a breast can lie,
    Inured to arms, and her own sex to fly?
    Yet to be wholly man she would disclaim;                           }
    To quit her tenfold pleasure at the game,                          }
    For frothy praises and an empty name.                              }
    Oh what a decent sight 'tis to behold
    All thy wife's magazine by auction sold!
    The belt, the crested plume, the several suits
    Of armour, and the Spanish leather boots!
    Yet these are they, that cannot bear the heat
    Of figured silks, and under sarcenet sweat.
    Behold the strutting Amazonian whore,
    She stands in guard with her right foot before;
    Her coats tucked up, and all her motions just,
    She stamps, and then cries,--Hah! at every thrust;
    But laugh to see her, tired with many a bout,
    Call for the pot, and like a man piss out.
    The ghosts of ancient Romans, should they rise,
    Would grin to see their daughters play a prize.
      Besides, what endless brawls by wives are bred?
    The curtain-lecture makes a mournful bed.
    Then, when she has thee sure within the sheets,
    Her cry begins, and the whole day repeats.
    Conscious of crimes herself, she teazes first;
    Thy servants are accused; thy whore is curst;
    She acts the jealous, and at will she cries;
    For womens' tears are but the sweat of eyes.
    Poor cuckold fool! thou think'st that love sincere,
    And sucks between her lips the falling tear;
    But search her cabinet, and thou shalt find
    Each tiller there with love-epistles lined.
    Suppose her taken in a close embrace,                              }
    This you would think so manifest a case,                           }
    No rhetoric could defend, no impudence outface;                    }
    And yet even then she cries,--The marriage-vow
    A mental reservation must allow;
    And there's a silent bargain still implied,                        }
    The parties should be pleased on either side,                      }
    And both may for their private needs provide.                      }
    Though men yourselves, and women us you call,
    Yet _homo_ is a common name for all.--
    There's nothing bolder than a woman caught;
    Guilt gives them courage to maintain their fault.
      You ask, from whence proceed these monstrous crimes?
    Once poor, and therefore chaste, in former times
    Our matrons were; no luxury found room,
    In low-roofed houses, and bare walls of loam;
    Their hands with labour hardened while 'twas light,
    And frugal sleep supplied the quiet night;
    While pinched with want, their hunger held them straight,
    When Hannibal was hovering at the gate:
    But wanton now, and lolling at our ease,
    We suffer all the inveterate ills of peace,
    And wasteful riot; whose destructive charms,
    Revenge the vanquished world of our victorious arms.
    No crime, no lustful postures are unknown,
    Since Poverty, our guardian god, is gone;
    Pride, laziness, and all luxurious arts,
    Pour, like a deluge, in from foreign parts:
    Since gold obscene, and silver found the way,                      }
    Strange fashions, with strange bullion, to convey,                 }
    And our plain simple manners to betray.                            }
      What care our drunken dames to whom they spread?
    Wine no distinction makes of tail or head.
    Who lewdly dancing at a midnight ball,
    For hot eringoes and fat oysters call:
    Full brimmers to their fuddled noses thrust,
    Brimmers, the last provocatives of lust;
    When vapours to their swimming brains advance,
    And double tapers on the table dance.
      Now think what bawdy dialogues they have,
    What Tullia talks to her confiding slave,
    At Modesty's old statue; when by night
    They make a stand, and from their litters light;
    The good man early to the levee goes,
    And treads the nasty paddle of his spouse.
      The secrets of the goddess named the Good,[119]
    Are even by boys and barbers understood;
    Where the rank matrons, dancing to the pipe,
    Gig with their bums, and are for action ripe;
    With music raised, they spread abroad their hair,
    And toss their heads like an enamoured mare;
    Laufella lays her garland by, and proves
    The mimic lechery of manly loves.
    Ranked with the lady the cheap sinner lies;
    For here not blood, but virtue, gives the prize.
    Nothing is feigned in this venereal strife;
    'Tis downright lust, and acted to the life.
    So full, so fierce, so vigorous, and so strong,
    That looking on would make old Nestor young.
    Impatient of delay, a general sound,                               }
    An universal groan of lust goes round;                             }
    For then, and only then, the sex sincere is found.                 }
    Now is the time of action; now begin,
    They cry, and let the lusty lovers in.
    The whoresons are asleep; then bring the slaves,
    And watermen, a race of strong-backed knaves.
      I wish, at least, our sacred rites were free
    From those pollutions of obscenity:
    But 'tis well known what singer,[120] how disguised,
    A lewd audacious action enterprized;
    Into the fair, with women mixed, he went,
    Armed with a huge two-handed instrument;
    A grateful present to those holy choirs,
    Where the mouse, guilty of his sex, retires,
    And even male pictures modestly are veiled:
    Yet no profaneness in that age prevailed;
    No scoffers at religious rites were found,
    Though now at every altar they abound.
      I hear your cautious counsel; you would say,
    Keep close your women under lock and key:--
    But, who shall keep those keepers? Women, nurst
    In craft; begin with those, and bribe them first.
    The sex is turned all whore; they love the game,
    And mistresses and maids are both the same.
      The poor Ogulnia, on the poet's day,
    Will borrow clothes and chair to see the play;
    She, who before had mortgaged her estate,
    And pawned the last remaining piece of plate.
    Some are reduced their utmost shifts to try;
    But women have no shame of poverty.
    They live beyond their stint, as if their store
    The more exhausted, would encrease the more:
    Some men, instructed by the labouring ant,
    Provide against the extremities of want;
    But womankind, that never knows a mean,
    Down to the dregs their sinking fortune drain:
    Hourly they give, and spend, and waste, and wear,
    And think no pleasure can be bought too dear.
      There are, who in soft eunuchs place their bliss,
    To shun the scrubbing of a bearded kiss,
    And 'scape abortion; but their solid joy
    Is when the page, already past a boy,
    Is caponed late, and to the gelder shown,
    With his two-pounders to perfection grown;
    When all the navel-string could give, appears;
    All but the beard, and that's the barber's loss, not theirs.
    Seen from afar, and famous for his ware,
    He struts into the bath among the fair;
    The admiring crew to their devotions fall,
    And, kneeling, on their new Priapus call.
    Kerved for his lady's use, with her he lies;
    And let him drudge for her, if thou art wise,
    Rather than trust him with thy favourite boy;
    He proffers death, in proffering to enjoy.
      If songs they love, the singer's voice they force
    Beyond his compass, 'till his quail-pipe's hoarse.
    His lute and lyre with their embrace is worn;
    With knots they trim it, and with gems adorn;
    Run over all the strings, and kiss the case,
    And make love to it in the master's place.
      A certain lady once, of high degree,
    To Janus vowed, and Vesta's deity,
    That Pollio[121] might, in singing, win the prize;
    Pollio, the dear, the darling of her eyes:
    She prayed, and bribed; what could she more have done
    For a sick husband, or an only son?
    With her face veiled, and heaving up her hands,
    The shameless suppliant at the altar stands;
    The forms of prayer she solemnly pursues,
    And, pale with fear, the offered entrails views.
    Answer, ye powers; for, if you heard her vow,
    Your godships, sure, had little else to do.
      This is not all; for actors[122] they implore;
    An impudence unknown to heaven before.
    The Aruspex,[123] tired with this religious rout,
    Is forced to stand so long, he gets the gout.
    But suffer not thy wife abroad to roam:
    If she loves singing, let her sing at home;
    Not strut in streets with Amazonian pace,
    For that's to cuckold thee before thy face.
      Their endless itch of news comes next in play;
    They vent their own, and hear what others say;
    Know what in Thrace, or what in France is done;
    The intrigues betwixt the stepdame and the son;
    Tell who loves who, what favours some partake,
    And who is jilted for another's sake;
    What pregnant widow in what month was made;
    How oft she did, and, doing, what she said.
      She first beholds the raging comet rise,
    Knows whom it threatens, and what lands destroys;
    Still for the newest news she lies in wait,
    And takes reports just entering at the gate.
    Wrecks, floods, and fires, whatever she can meet,
    She spreads, and is the fame of every street.
      This is a grievance; but the next is worse;
    A very judgment, and her neighbours' curse;
    For, if their barking dog disturb her ease,
    No prayer can bend her, no excuse appease.
    The unmannered malefactor is arraigned;
    But first the master, who the cur maintained,
    Must feel the scourge. By night she leaves her bed,
    By night her bathing equipage is led,
    That marching armies a less noise create;
    She moves in tumult, and she sweats in state.
    Meanwhile, her guests their appetites must keep;
    Some gape for hunger, and some gasp for sleep.
    At length she comes, all flushed; but ere she sup,                 }
    Swallows a swinging preparation-cup,                               }
    And then, to clear her stomach, spews it up.                       }
    The deluge-vomit all the floor o'erflows,
    And the sour savour nauseates every nose.
    She drinks again, again she spews a lake;
    Her wretched husband sees, and dares not speak;
    But mutters many a curse against his wife,
    And damns himself for choosing such a life.
      But of all plagues, the greatest is untold;
    The book-learned wife, in Greek and Latin bold;
    The critic-dame, who at her table sits,                            }
    Homer and Virgil quotes, and weighs their wits,                    }
    And pities Dido's agonizing fits.                                  }
    She has so far the ascendant of the board,
    The prating pedant puts not in one word;
    The man of law is non-plust in his suit,
    Nay, every other female tongue is mute.
    Hammers, and beating anvils, you would swear,
    And Vulcan, with his whole militia, there.
    Tabors and trumpets, cease; for she alone
    Is able to redeem the labouring moon.[124]
    Even wit's a burthen, when it talks too long;
    But she, who has no continence of tongue,
    Should walk in breeches, and should wear a beard,
    And mix among the philosophic herd.
    O what a midnight curse has he, whose side
    Is pestered with a mood and figure bride!
    Let mine, ye gods! (if such must be my fate,)
    No logic learn, nor history translate,
    But rather be a quiet, humble fool;
    I hate a wife to whom I go to school,
    Who climbs the grammar-tree, distinctly knows
    Where noun, and verb, and participle grows;
    Corrects her country-neighbour; and, a-bed,
    For breaking Priscian's breaks her husband's head.[125]
      The gaudy gossip, when she's set agog,
    In jewels drest, and at each ear a bob,
    Goes flaunting out, and, in her trim of pride,
    Thinks all she says or does is justified.
    When poor, she's scarce a tolerable evil;
    But rich, and fine, a wife's a very devil.
      She duly, once a month, renews her face;
    Meantime, it lies in daub, and hid in grease.
    Those are the husband's nights; she craves her due,
    He takes fat kisses, and is stuck in glue.
    But to the loved adulterer when she steers,
    Fresh from the bath, in brightness she appears:
    For him the rich Arabia sweats her gum,                            }
    And precious oils from distant Indies come,                        }
    How haggardly soe'er she looks at home.                            }
    The eclipse then vanishes, and all her face
    Is opened, and restored to every grace;
    The crust removed, her cheeks, as smooth as silk,
    Are polished with a wash of asses milk;
    And should she to the farthest north be sent,
    A train of these[126] attend her banishment.
    But hadst thou seen her plaistered up before,
    'Twas so unlike a face, it seemed a sore.
      'Tis worth our while, to know what all the day
    They do, and how they pass their time away;
    For, if o'er-night the husband has been slack,                     }
    Or counterfeited sleep, and turned his back,                       }
    Next day, be sure, the servants go to wrack.                       }
    The chamber-maid and dresser are called whores,
    The page is stript, and beaten out of doors;
    The whole house suffers for the master's crime,
    And he himself is warned to wake another time.
      She hires tormentors by the year; she treats
    Her visitors, and talks, but still she beats;
    Beats while she paints her face, surveys her gown,
    Casts up the day's account, and still beats on:
    Tired out, at length, with an outrageous tone,
    She bids them in the devil's name be gone.
    Compared with such a proud, insulting dame,
    Sicilian tyrants[127] may renounce their name.
    For, if she hastes abroad to take the air,
    Or goes to Isis' church, (the bawdy house of prayer,)
    She hurries all her handmaids to the task;
    Her head, alone, will twenty dressers ask.
    Psecas, the chief, with breast and shoulders bare,
    Trembling, considers every sacred hair;
    If any straggler from his rank be found,
    A pinch must for the mortal sin compound.
    Psecas is not in fault; but in the glass,
    The dame's offended at her own ill face.
    That maid is banished; and another girl,
    More dexterous, manages the comb and curl.
    The rest are summoned on a point so nice,
    And, first, the grave old woman gives advice;
    The next is called, and so the turn goes round,
    As each for age, or wisdom, is renowned:
    Such counsel, such deliberate care they take,
    As if her life and honour lay at stake:
    With curls on curls, they build her head before,
    And mount it with a formidable tower.
    A giantess she seems; but look behind,
    And then she dwindles to the pigmy kind.
    Duck-legged, short-waisted, such a dwarf she is,
    That she must rise on tip-toes for a kiss.
    Meanwhile, her husband's whole estate is spent!
    He may go bare, while she receives his rent.
    She minds him not; she lives not as a wife,
    But, like a bawling neighbour, full of strife:
    Near him in this alone, that she extends
    Her hate to all his servants and his friends.
      Bellona's priests,[128] an eunuch at their head,
    About the streets a mad procession lead;
    The venerable gelding, large, and high,
    O'erlooks the herd of his inferior fry.
    His aukward clergymen about him prance,
    And beat the timbrels to their mystic dance;
    Guiltless of testicles, they tear their throats,
    And squeak, in treble, their unmanly notes.
    Meanwhile, his cheeks the mitred prophet swells,
    And dire presages of the year foretels;
    Unless with eggs (his priestly hire) they haste
    To expiate, and avert the autumnal blast;
    And add beside a murrey-coloured vest,[129]
    Which, in their places, may receive the pest,
    And, thrown into the flood, their crimes may bear,
    To purge the unlucky omens of the year.
    The astonished matrons pay, before the rest;
    That sex is still obnoxious to the priest.
      Through ye they beat, and plunge into the stream,
    If so the God has warned them in a dream.
    Weak in their limbs, but in devotion strong,                       }
    On their bare hands and feet they crawl along                      }
    A whole field's length, the laughter of the throng.                }
    Should Io (Io's priest, I mean) command
    A pilgrimage to Meroe's burning sand,
    Through deserts they would seek the secret spring,
    And holy water for lustration bring.
    How can they pay their priests too much respect,
    Who trade with heaven, and earthly gains neglect!
    With him domestic gods discourse by night;
    By day, attended by his choir in white,
    The bald pate tribe runs madding through the street,
    And smile to see with how much ease they cheat.
    The ghostly sire forgives the wife's delights,
    Who sins, through frailty, on forbidden nights,
    And tempts her husband in the holy time,
    When carnal pleasure is a mortal crime.
    The sweating image shakes his head, but he,
    With mumbled prayers, atones the deity.
    The pious priesthood the fat goose receive,
    And, they once bribed, the godhead must forgive.
      No sooner these remove, but full of fear,
    A gipsey Jewess whispers in your ear,
    And begs an alms; an high-priest's daughter she,                   }
    Versed in their Talmud, and divinity,                              }
    And prophesies beneath a shady tree.                               }
    Her goods a basket, and old hay her bed,
    She strolls, and, telling fortunes, gains her bread:
    Farthings, and some small monies, are her fees;
    Yet she interprets all your dreams for these,
    Foretels the estate, when the rich uncle dies,
    And sees a sweetheart in the sacrifice.
    Such toys, a pigeon's entrails can disclose,
    Which yet the Armenian augur far outgoes;
    In dogs, a victim more obscene, he rakes;
    And murdered infants for inspection takes:
    For gain his impious practice he pursues;
    For gain will his accomplices accuse.
      More credit yet is to Chaldeans[130] given;
    What they foretel, is deemed the voice of heaven.
    Their answers, as from Hammon's altar, come;
    Since now the Delphian oracles are dumb,
    And mankind, ignorant of future fate,
    Believes what fond astrologers relate.
      Of these the most in vogue is he, who, sent
    Beyond seas, is returned from banishment;
    His art who to aspiring Otho[131] sold,
    And sure succession to the crown foretold;
    For his esteem is in his exile placed;
    The more believed, the more he was disgraced.
    No astrologic wizard honour gains,
    Who has not oft been banished, or in chains.
    He gets renown, who, to the halter near,
    But narrowly escapes, and buys it dear.
      From him your wife enquires the planets' will,
    When the black jaundice shall her mother kill;
    Her sister's and her uncle's end would know,
    But, first, consults his art, when you shall go;
    And,--what's the greatest gift that heaven can give,--
    If after her the adulterer shall live.
    She neither knows, nor cares to know, the rest,
    If Mars and Saturn[132] shall the world infest;
    Or Jove and Venus, with their friendly rays,
    Will interpose, and bring us better days.
      Beware the woman too, and shun her sight,
    Who in these studies does herself delight,
    By whom a greasy almanack is born,
    With often handling, like chaft amber worn:
    Not now consulting, but consulted, she
    Of the twelve houses, and their lords, is free.
    She, if the scheme a fatal journey show,
    Stays safe at home, but lets her husband go.
    If but a mile she travel out of town,
    The planetary hour must first be known,
    And lucky moment; if her eye but aches,
    Or itches, its decumbiture she takes;
    No nourishment receives in her disease,
    But what the stars and Ptolemy[133] shall please.
    The middle sort, who have not much to spare,                       }
    To chiromancers' cheaper art repair,                               }
    Who clap the pretty palm, to make the lines more fair.             }
    But the rich matron, who has more to give,
    Her answers from the Brachman[134] will receive;
    Skilled in the globe and sphere, he gravely stands,
    And, with his compass, measures seas and lands.
      The poorest of the sex have still an itch
    To know their fortunes, equal to the rich.
    The dairy-maid enquires, if she shall take
    The trusty tailor, and the cook forsake.
      Yet these, though poor, the pain of childbed bear,
    And without nurses their own infants rear:
    You seldom hear of the rich mantle spread
    For the babe, born in the great lady's bed.
    Such is the power of herbs, such arts they use
    To make them barren, or their fruit to lose.
    But thou, whatever slops she will have bought,
    Be thankful, and supply the deadly draught;
    Help her to make man-slaughter; let her bleed,
    And never want for savin at her need.
    For, if she holds till her nine months be run,
    Thou may'st be father to an Ethiop's son;[135]
    A boy, who, ready gotten to thy hands,
    By law is to inherit all thy lands;
    One of that hue, that, should he cross the way,
    His omen would discolour all the day.[136]
      I pass the foundling by, a race unknown,
    At doors exposed, whom matrons make their own;
    And into noble families advance
    A nameless issue, the blind work of chance.
    Indulgent fortune does her care employ,
    And, smiling, broods upon the naked boy:
    Her garment spreads, and laps him in the fold,
    And covers with her wings from nightly cold:
    Gives him her blessing, puts him in a way,
    Sets up the farce, and laughs at her own play.
    Him she promotes; she favours him alone,
    And makes provision for him as her own.
      The craving wife the force of magic tries,
    And filters for the unable husband buys;
    The potion works not on the part designed,
    But turns his brains, and stupifies his mind.
    The sotted moon-calf gapes, and, staring on,
    Sees his own business by another done:
    A long oblivion, a benumbing frost,
    Constrains his head, and yesterday is lost.
    Some nimbler juice would make him foam and rave,
    Like that Cæsonia[137] to her Caius gave,
    Who, plucking from the forehead of the foal
    His mother's love,[138] infused it in the bowl;
    The boiling blood ran hissing in his veins,
    Till the mad vapour mounted to his brains.
    The Thunderer was not half so much on fire,
    When Juno's girdle kindled his desire.
    What woman will not use the poisoning trade,
    When Cæsar's wife the precedent has made?
    Let Agrippina's mushroom[139] be forgot,
    Given to a slavering, old, unuseful sot;
    That only closed the driv'ling dotard's eyes,
    And sent his godhead downward to the skies;
    But this fierce potion calls for fire and sword,
    Nor spares the commons, when it strikes the lord.
    So many mischiefs were in one combined;
    So much one single poisoner cost mankind.
      If step-dames seek their sons-in-law to kill,
    'Tis venial trespass--let them have their will;
    But let the child, entrusted to the care
    Of his own mother, of her bread beware;
    Beware the food she reaches with her hand,--
    The morsel is intended for thy land.
    Thy tutor be thy taster, ere thou eat;
    There's poison in thy drink and in thy meat.
      You think this feigned; the satire, in a rage,
    Struts in the buskins of the tragic stage;
    Forgets his business is to laugh and bite,
    And will of deaths and dire revenges write.
    Would it were all a fable that you read!
    But Drymon's wife[140] pleads guilty to the deed.
    I, she confesses, in the fact was caught,
    Two sons dispatching at one deadly draught.
    What, two! two sons, thou viper, in one day!
    Yes, seven, she cries, if seven were in my way.
    Medea's legend is no more a lie,
    Our age adds credit to antiquity.
    Great ills, we grant, in former times did reign,
    And murders then were done, but not for gain.
    Less admiration to great crimes is due,
    Which they through wrath, or through revenge pursue;
    For, weak of reason, impotent of will,
    The sex is hurried headlong into ill;
    And like a cliff, from its foundations torn
    By raging earthquakes, into seas is borne.
    But those are fiends, who crimes from thought begin,
    And, cool in mischief, meditate the sin.
    They read the example of a pious wife,
    Redeeming, with her own, her husband's life;
    Yet if the laws did that exchange afford,
    Would save their lap-dog sooner than their lord.
      Where'er you walk the Belides[141] you meet,
    And Clytemnestras grow in every street;
    But here's the difference,--Agamemnon's wife
    Was a gross butcher with a bloody knife;
    But murder now is to perfection grown,
    And subtle poisons are employed alone;
    Unless some antidote prevents their arts,
    And lines with balsam all the nobler parts.
    In such a case, reserved for such a need,
    Rather than fail, the dagger does the deed.




THE

TENTH SATIRE

OF

JUVENAL.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _The Poet's design, in this divine Satire, is, to represent the
      various wishes and desires of mankind, and to set out the
      folly of them. He runs through all the several heads, of
      riches, honours, eloquence, fame for martial achievements,
      long life, and beauty; and gives instances in each, how
      frequently they have proved the ruin of those that owned
      them. He concludes, therefore, that, since we generally
      choose so ill for ourselves, we should do better to leave it
      to the gods to make the choice for us. All we can safely
      ask of heaven, lies within a very small compass--it is
      but health of body and mind; and if we have these, it is
      not much matter what we want besides; for we have already
      enough to make us happy._

    Look round the habitable world, how few
    Know their own good, or, knowing it, pursue.
    How void of reason are our hopes and fears!
    What in the conduct of our life appears
    So well designed, so luckily begun,
    But when we have our wish, we wish undone?
      Whole houses, of their whole desires possest,
    Are often ruined at their own request.
    In wars and peace things hurtful we require,
    When made obnoxious to our own desire.
      With laurels some have fatally been crowned;                     }
    Some, who the depths of eloquence have found,                      }
    In that unnavigable stream were drowned.                           }
      The brawny fool, who did his vigour boast;
    In that presuming confidence was lost;[142]
    But more have been by avarice opprest,
    And heaps of money crowded in the chest:
    Unwieldy sums of wealth, which higher mount
    Than files of marshalled figures can account;
    To which the stores of Croesus, in the scale,                      }
    Would look like little dolphins, when they sail                    }
    In the vast shadow of the British whale.                           }
      For this, in Nero's arbitrary time,
    When virtue was a guilt, and wealth a crime,
    A troop of cut-throat guards were sent to seize
    The rich men's goods, and gut their palaces:
    The mob, commissioned by the government,
    Are seldom to an empty garret sent.
    The fearful passenger, who travels late,
    Charged with the carriage of a paltry plate,
    Shakes at the moonshine shadow of a rush,
    And sees a red-coat rise from every bush;
    The beggar sings, even when he sees the place
    Beset with thieves, and never mends his pace.
      Of all the vows, the first and chief request
    Of each, is--to be richer than the rest:
    And yet no doubts the poor man's draught controul,
    He dreads no poison in his homely bowl;
    Then fear the deadly drug, when gems divine
    Enchase the cup, and sparkle in the wine.
      Will you not now the pair of sages praise,
    Who the same end pursued by several ways?
    One pitied, one contemned, the woeful times;
    One laughed at follies, one lamented crimes.
    Laughter is easy; but the wonder lies,
    What stores of brine supplied the weeper's eyes.
    Democritus could feed his spleen, and shake
    His sides and shoulders, till he felt them ache;
    Though in his country town no lictors were,
    Nor rods, nor axe, nor tribune, did appear;
    Nor all the foppish gravity of show,
    Which cunning magistrates on crowds bestow.
      What had he done, had he beheld on high
    Our prætor seated in mock majesty;
    His chariot rolling o'er the dusty place,
    While, with dumb pride, and a set formal face,
    He moves, in the dull ceremonial track,
    With Jove's embroidered coat upon his back!
    A suit of hangings had not more opprest
    His shoulders, than that long laborious vest;
    A heavy gewgaw, called a crown, that spread
    About his temples, drowned his narrow head,
    And would have crushed it with the massy freight,
    But that a sweating slave sustained the weight;
    A slave, in the same chariot seen to ride,
    To mortify the mighty madman's pride.
    Add now the imperial eagle, raised on high,
    With golden beak, the mark of majesty;
    Trumpets before, and on the left and right
    A cavalcade of nobles, all in white;
    In their own natures false and flattering tribes,
    But made his friends by places and by bribes.
      In his own age, Democritus could find
    Sufficient cause to laugh at human kind:
    Learn from so great a wit; a land of bogs,
    With ditches fenced, a heaven fat with fogs,
    May form a spirit fit to sway the state,
    And make the neighbouring monarchs fear their fate.
      He laughs at all the vulgar cares and fears;
    At their vain triumphs, and their vainer tears:
    An equal temper in his mind he found,
    When fortune flattered him, and when she frowned.
    'Tis plain, from hence, that what our vows request
    Are hurtful things, or useless at the best.
      Some ask for envied power; which public hate
    Pursues, and hurries headlong to their fate:
    Down go the titles; and the statue crowned,
    Is by base hands in the next river drowned.
    The guiltless horses, and the chariot wheel,
    The same effects of vulgar fury feel:
    The smith prepares his hammer for the stroke,
    While the lung'd bellows hissing fire provoke.
    Sejanus, almost first of Roman names,[143]
    The great Sejanus crackles in the flames:
    Formed in the forge, the pliant brass is laid                      }
    On anvils; and of head and limbs are made,                         }
    Pans, cans, and piss-pots, a whole kitchen trade.                  }
      Adorn your doors with laurels; and a bull,
    Milk white, and large, lead to the Capitol;
    Sejanus with a rope is dragged along,
    The sport and laughter of the giddy throng!
    Good Lord! they cry, what Ethiop lips he has;
    How foul a snout, and what a hanging face!
    By heaven, I never could endure his sight!
    But say, how came his monstrous crimes to light?
    What is the charge, and who the evidence,
    (The saviour of the nation and the prince?)
    Nothing of this; but our old Cæsar sent
    A noisy letter to his parliament.
    Nay, sirs, if Cæsar writ, I ask no more;
    He's guilty, and the question's out of door.
    How goes the mob? (for that's a mighty thing,)
    When the king's trump, the mob are for the king:
    They follow fortune, and the common cry
    Is still against the rogue condemned to die.
      But the same very mob, that rascal crowd,
    Had cried Sejanus, with a shout as loud,
    Had his designs (by fortune's favour blest)
    Succeeded, and the prince's age opprest.
    But long, long since, the times have changed their face,
    The people grown degenerate and base;
    Not suffered now the freedom of their choice
    To make their magistrates, and sell their voice.
      Our wise forefathers, great by sea and land,
    Had once the power and absolute command;
    All offices of trust themselves disposed;
    Raised whom they pleased, and whom they pleased deposed:
    But we, who give our native rights away,
    And our enslaved posterity betray,
    Are now reduced to beg an alms, and go
    On holidays to see a puppet-show.
      There was a damned design, cries one, no doubt,
    For warrants are already issued out:
    I met Brutidius in a mortal fright,
    He's dipt for certain, and plays least in sight;
    I fear the rage of our offended prince,
    Who thinks the senate slack in his defence.
    Come, let us haste, our loyal zeal to show,
    And spurn the wretched corpse of Cæsar's foe:
    But let our slaves be present there; lest they
    Accuse their masters, and for gain betray.--
    Such were the whispers of those jealous times,
    About Sejanus' punishment and crimes.
      Now, tell me truly, wouldst thou change thy fate,
    To be, like him, first minister of state?
    To have thy levees crowded with resort,
    Of a depending, gaping, servile court;
    Dispose all honours of the sword and gown,
    Grace with a nod, and ruin with a frown;
    To hold thy prince in pupillage, and sway
    That monarch, whom the mastered world obey?
    While he, intent on secret lusts alone,
    Lives to himself, abandoning the throne;
    Cooped in a narrow isle,[144] observing dreams
    With flattering wizards, and erecting schemes!
      I well believe thou wouldst be great as he,
    For every man's a fool to that degree:
    All wish the dire prerogative to kill;
    Even they would have the power, who want the will:
    But wouldst thou have thy wishes understood,
    To take the bad together with the good?
    Wouldst thou not rather choose a small renown,
    To be the mayor of some poor paltry town;
    Bigly to look, and barbarously to speak;
    To pound false weights, and scanty measures break?
    Then, grant we that Sejanus went astray
    In every wish, and knew not how to pray;
    For he, who grasped the world's exhausted store,
    Yet never had enough, but wished for more,
    Raised a top-heavy tower, of monstrous height,
    Which, mouldering, crushed him underneath the weight.
      What did the mighty Pompey's fall beget,
    And ruined him, who, greater than the Great,[145]
    The stubborn pride of Roman nobles broke,
    And bent their haughty necks beneath his yoke:
    What else but his immoderate lust of power,
    Prayers made and granted in a luckless hour?
    For few usurpers to the shades descend
    By a dry death, or with a quiet end.
      The boy, who scarce has paid his entrance down
    To his proud pedant, or declined a noun,
    (So small an elf, that, when the days are foul,
    He and his satchel must be borne to school,)
    Yet prays, and hopes, and aims at nothing less,
    To prove a Tully, or Demosthenes:
    But both those orators, so much renowned,
    In their own depths of eloquence were drowned:[146]
    The hand and head were never lost of those
    Who dealt in doggrel, or who punned in prose.
      "Fortune foretuned the dying notes of Rome,
    Till I, thy consul sole, consoled thy doom."[147]
    His fate had crept below the lifted swords,
    Had all his malice been to murder words.
    I rather would be Mævius, thrash for rhymes
    Like his, the scorn and scandal of the times,
    Than that Philippic[148], fatally divine,
    Which is inscribed the second, should be mine.
    Nor he, the wonder of the Grecian throng,
    Who drove them with the torrent of his tongue,
    Who shook the theatres, and swayed the state
    Of Athens, found a more propitious fate.
    Whom, born beneath a boding horoscope,
    His sire, the blear-eyed Vulcan of a shop,
    From Mars his forge, sent to Minerva's schools,
    To learn the unlucky art of wheedling fools.
      With itch of honour, and opinion vain,
    All things beyond their native worth we strain;
    The spoils of war, brought to Feretrian Jove,
    An empty coat of armour hung above
    The conqueror's chariot and in triumph borne,
    A streamer from a boarded galley torn,
    A chap-fallen beaver loosely hanging by
    The cloven helm, an arch of victory;
    On whose high convex sits a captive foe,
    And, sighing, casts a mournful look below;[149]--
    Of every nation each illustrious name,
    Such toys as these have cheated into fame;
    Exchanging solid quiet, to obtain
    The windy satisfaction of the brain.
      So much the thirst of honour fires the blood;
    So many would be great, so few be good:
    For who would Virtue for herself regard,
    Or wed, without the portion of reward?
    Yet this mad chace of fame, by few pursued,
    Has drawn destruction on the multitude;
    This avarice of praise in times to come,
    Those long inscriptions crowded on the tomb;
    Should some wild fig-tree take her native bent,
    And heave below the gaudy monument,
    Would crack the marble titles, and disperse
    The characters of all the lying verse.
    For sepulchres themselves must crumbling fall
    In time's abyss, the common grave of all.
      Great Hannibal within the balance lay,
    And tell how many pounds his ashes weigh;
    Whom Afric was not able to contain,
    Whose length runs level with the Atlantic main,
    And wearies fruitful Nilus, to convey
    His sun-beat waters by so long a way;
    Which Ethiopia's double clime divides,
    And elephants in other mountains hides.
    Spain first he won, the Pyreneans past,
    And steepy Alps, the mounds that nature cast;
    And with corroding juices, as he went,
    A passage through the living rocks he rent:
    Then, like a torrent rolling from on high,
    He pours his headlong rage on Italy,
    In three victorious battles over-run;
    Yet, still uneasy, cries,--There's nothing done,
    Till level with the ground their gates are laid,
    And Punic flags on Roman towers displayed.
    Ask what a face belonged to this high fame,
    His picture scarcely would deserve a frame:
    A sign-post dauber would disdain to paint
    The one-eyed hero on his elephant.
    Now, what's his end, O charming Glory! say,
    What rare fifth act to crown this huffing play?
    In one deciding battle overcome,
    He flies, is banished from his native home;
    Begs refuge in a foreign court, and there
    Attends, his mean petition to prefer;
    Repulsed by surly grooms, who wait before
    The sleeping tyrant's interdicted door.
      What wonderous sort of death has heaven designed,                }
    Distinguished from the herd of human kind,                         }
    For so untamed, so turbulent a mind?                               }
    Nor swords at hand, nor hissing darts afar,
    Are doomed to avenge the tedious bloody war;
    But poison, drawn through a ring's hollow plate,
    Must finish him--a sucking infant's fate.
    Go, climb the rugged Alps, ambitious fool,
    To please the boys, and be a theme at school.
      One world sufficed not Alexander's mind;
    Cooped up, he seemed in earth and seas confined,
    And, struggling, stretched his restless limbs about
    The narrow globe, to find a passage out:
    Yet entered in the brick-built town,[150] he tried
    The tomb, and found the strait dimensions wide.
    Death only this mysterious truth unfolds,
    The mighty soul how small a body holds.
      Old Greece a tale of Athos would make out,[151]
    Cut from the continent, and sailed about;
    Seas hid with navies, chariots passing o'er
    The channel, on a bridge from shore to shore:
    Rivers, whose depth no sharp beholder sees,
    Drunk at an army's dinner to the lees;
    With a long legend of romantic things,
    Which in his cups the bowsy poet sings.
    But how did he return, this haughty brave,
    Who whipt the winds, and made the sea his slave?
    (Though Neptune took unkindly to be bound,                         }
    And Eurus never such hard usage found                              }
    In his Æolian prison under ground;)                                }
    What god so mean, even he who points the way,[152]
    So merciless a tyrant to obey!
    But how returned he, let us ask again?                             }
    In a poor skiff he passed the bloody main,                         }
    Choked with the slaughtered bodies of his train.                   }
    For fame he prayed, but let the event declare
    He had no mighty penn'worth of his prayer.
      Jove, grant me length of life, and years good store
    Heap on my bending back! I ask no more.--
    Both sick and healthful, old and young, conspire
    In this one silly mischievous desire.
    Mistaken blessing, which old age they call,
    'Tis a long, nasty, darksome hospital:
    A ropy chain of rheums; a visage rough,
    Deformed, unfeatured, and a skin of buff;
    A stitch-fallen cheek, that hangs below the jaw;
    Such wrinkles as a skilful hand would draw
    For an old grandame ape, when, with a grace,
    She sits at squat, and scrubs her leathern face.
      In youth, distinctions infinite abound;
    No shape, or feature, just alike are found;
    The fair, the black, the feeble, and the strong:                   }
    But the same foulness does to age belong.                          }
    The self-same palsy, both in limbs and tongue;                     }
    The skull and forehead one bald barren plain,
    And gums unarmed to mumble meat in vain;
    Besides, the eternal drivel, that supplies
    The dropping beard, from nostrils, mouth, and eyes.
    His wife and children lothe him, and, what's worse,
    Himself does his offensive carrion curse!
    Flatterers forsake him too; for who would kill
    Himself, to be remembered in a will?
    His taste not only pall'd to wine and meat,
    But to the relish of a nobler treat.
    The limber nerve, in vain provoked to rise,
    Inglorious from the field of battle flies;
    Poor feeble dotard! how could he advance
    With his blue head-piece, and his broken lance?
    Add, that, endeavouring still, without effect,
    A lust more sordid justly we suspect.
      Those senses lost, behold a new defeat,
    The soul dislodging from another seat.
    What music, or enchanting voice, can cheer
    A stupid, old, impenetrable ear?
    No matter in what place, or what degree
    Of the full theatre he sits to see;
    Cornets and trumpets cannot reach his ear;
    Under an actor's nose he's never near.
      His boy must bawl, to make him understand
    The hour o'the day, or such a lord's at hand;
    The little blood that creeps within his veins,
    Is but just warmed in a hot fever's pains.
    In fine, he wears no limb about him sound,
    With sores and sicknesses beleaguered round
    Ask me their names, I sooner could relate
    How many drudges on salt Hippia wait;
    What crowds of patients the town doctor kills,
    Or how, last fall, he raised the weekly bills;
    What provinces by Basilus were spoiled;
    What herds of heirs by guardians are beguiled;
    How many bouts a-day that bitch has tried;
    How many boys that pedagogue can ride;
    What lands and lordships for their owner know
    My quondam barber, but his worship now.
      This dotard of his broken back complains;
    One his legs fail, and one his shoulder pains:
    Another is of both his eyes bereft,
    And envies who has one for aiming left;
    A fifth, with trembling lips expecting stands
    As in his childhood, crammed by others hands;
    One, who at sight of supper opened wide                            }
    His jaws before, and whetted grinders tried,                       }
    Now only yawns, and waits to be supplied;                          }
    Like a young swallow, when, with weary wings,
    Expected food her fasting mother brings.
      His loss of members is a heavy curse,
    But all his faculties decayed, a worse.
    His servants' names he has forgotten quite;
    Knows not his friend who supped with him last night:
    Not even the children he begot and bred;
    Or his will knows them not; for, in their stead,
    In form of law, a common hackney jade,
    Sole heir, for secret services, is made:
    So lewd, and such a battered brothel whore,
    That she defies all comers at her door.
    Well, yet suppose his senses are his own,
    He lives to be chief mourner for his son:
    Before his face, his wife and brother burns;
    He numbers all his kindred in their urns.
    These are the fines he pays for living long,
    And dragging tedious age in his own wrong;
    Griefs always green, a household still in tears,                   }
    Sad pomps, a threshold thronged with daily biers,                  }
    And liveries of black for length of years.                         }
      Next to the raven's age, the Pylian king[153]
    Was longest lived of any two-legged thing.
    Blest, to defraud the grave so long, to mount
    His numbered years, and on his right hand count![154]
    Three hundred seasons, guzzling must of wine!--
    But hold a while, and hear himself repine
    At fate's unequal laws, and at the clue
    Which, merciless in length, the midmost sister drew.[155]
    When his brave son upon the funeral pyre
    He saw extended, and his beard on fire,
    He turned, and, weeping, asked his friends, what crime
    Had cursed his age to this unhappy time?
      Thus mourned old Peleus for Achilles slain,
    And thus Ulysses' father did complain.
    How fortunate an end had Priam made,
    Among his ancestors a mighty shade,
    While Troy yet stood; when Hector, with the race
    Of royal bastards, might his funeral grace;
    Amidst the tears of Trojan dames inurned,
    And by his loyal daughters truly mourned!
    Had heaven so blest him, he had died before
    The fatal fleet to Sparta Paris bore:
    But mark what age produced,--he lived to see
    His town in flames, his falling monarchy.
    In fine, the feeble sire, reduced by fate,
    To change his sceptre for a sword, too late,
    His last effort before Jove's altar tries,
    A soldier half, and half a sacrifice:
    Falls like an ox that waits the coming blow,
    Old and unprofitable to the plough.[156]
      At least he died a man; his queen survived,
    To howl, and in a barking body lived.[157]
      I hasten to our own; nor will relate
    Great Mithridates,[158] and rich Croesus' fate;[159]
    Whom Solon wisely counselled to attend
    The name of happy, till he knew his end.
      That Marius was an exile, that he fled,
    Was ta'en, in ruined Carthage begged his bread;
    All these were owing to a life too long:
    For whom had Rome beheld so happy, young?
    High in his chariot, and with laurel crowned,
    When he had led the Cimbrian captives round
    The Roman streets, descending from his state,
    In that blest hour he should have begged his fate;
    Then, then, he might have died of all admired,
    And his triumphant soul with shouts expired.
      Campania, Fortune's malice to prevent,
    To Pompey an indulgent fever sent;
    But public prayers imposed on heaven to give
    Their much loved leader an unkind reprieve;
    The city's fate and his conspired to save
    The head reserved for an Egyptian slave.[160]
      Cethegus, though a traitor to the state,
    And tortured, 'scaped this ignominious fate;[161]
    And Sergius, who a bad cause bravely tried,
    All of a piece, and undiminished, died.[162]
      To Venus, the fond mother makes a prayer,
    That all her sons and daughters may be fair:
    True, for the boys a mumbling vow she sends,
    But for the girls the vaulted temple rends:
    They must be finished pieces; 'tis allowed
    Diana's beauty made Latona proud,
    And pleased to see the wondering people pray
    To the new-rising sister of the day.
      And yet Lucretia's fate would bar that vow;
    And fair Virginia[163] would her fate bestow
    On Rutila, and change her faultless make
    For the foul rumple of her camel back.
      But, for his mother's boy, the beau, what frights
    His parents have by day, what anxious nights!
    Form joined with virtue is a sight too rare;
    Chaste is no epithet to suit with fair.
    Suppose the same traditionary strain
    Of rigid manners in the house remain;
    Inveterate truth, an old plain Sabine's heart;
    Suppose that nature too has done her part,
    Infused into his soul a sober grace,
    And blushed a modest blood into his face,
    (For nature is a better guardian far
    Than saucy pedants, or dull tutors are;)
    Yet still the youth must ne'er arrive at man,
    (So much almighty bribes and presents can;)
    Even with a parent, where persuasions fail,
    Money is impudent, and will prevail.
      We never read of such a tyrant king,
    Who gelt a boy deformed, to hear him sing;
    Nor Nero, in his more luxurious rage,
    E'er made a mistress of an ugly page:
    Sporus, his spouse, nor crooked was, nor lame,                     }
    With mountain back, and belly, from the game                       }
    Cross-barred; but both his sexes well became.                      }
    Go, boast your Springal, by his beauty curst
    To ills, nor think I have declared the worst;
    His form procures him journey-work; a strife
    Betwixt town-madams, and the merchant's wife:
    Guess, when he undertakes this public war,
    What furious beasts offended cuckolds are.
      Adulterers are with dangers round beset;
    Born under Mars, they cannot 'scape the net;
    And, from revengeful husbands, oft have tried
    Worse handling than severest laws provide:
    One stabs, one slashes, one, with cruel art,
    Makes colon suffer for the peccant part.
      But your Endymion, your smooth smock-faced boy,
    Unrivalled, shall a beauteous dame enjoy.
    Not so: one more salacious, rich, and old,
    Outbids, and buys her pleasure for her gold:
    Now, he must moil, and drudge, for one he lothes;
    She keeps him high in equipage and clothes;
    She pawns her jewels, and her rich attire,
    And thinks the workman worthy of his hire.
    In all things else immoral, stingy, mean,
    But, in her lusts, a conscionable quean.
      She may be handsome, yet be chaste, you say;--
    Good observator, not so fast away;
    Did it not cost the modest youth his life,
    Who shunned the embraces of his father's wife?[164]
    And was not t'other stripling forced to fly,                       }
    Who coldly did his patron's queen deny,                            }
    And pleaded laws of hospitality?[165]                              }
    The ladies charged them home, and turned the tale;
    With shame they reddened, and with spite grew pale.
    'Tis dangerous to deny the longing dame;
    She loses pity, who has lost her shame.
      Now Silius wants thy counsel, give advice;
    Wed Cæsar's wife, or die--the choice is nice.[166]
    Her comet-eyes she darts on every grace,
    And takes a fatal liking to his face.
    Adorned with bridal pomp, she sits in state;
    The public notaries and Aruspex wait;
    The genial bed is in the garden dressed,                           }
    The portion paid, and every rite expressed,                        }
    Which in a Roman marriage is professed.                            }
    'Tis no stolen wedding this; rejecting awe,
    She scorns to marry, but in form of law:
    In this moot case, your judgment to refuse
    Is present death, besides the night you lose:
    If you consent, 'tis hardly worth your pain,
    A day or two of anxious life you gain;
    Till loud reports through all the town have past,
    And reach the prince--for cuckolds hear the last.
    Indulge thy pleasure, youth, and take thy swing,
    For not to take is but the self-same thing;
    Inevitable death before thee lies,
    But looks more kindly through a lady's eyes.
      What then remains? are we deprived of will;
    Must we not wish, for fear of wishing ill?
    Receive my counsel, and securely move;--
    Intrust thy fortune to the powers above;
    Leave them to manage for thee, and to grant
    What their unerring wisdom sees thee want:
    In goodness, as in greatness, they excel;
    Ah, that we loved ourselves but half so well!
    We, blindly by our head-strong passions led,
    Are hot for action, and desire to wed;
    Then wish for heirs; but to the gods alone                         }
    Our future offspring, and our wives, are known;                    }
    The audacious strumpet, and ungracious son.                        }
      Yet, not to rob the priests of pious gain,
    That altars be not wholly built in vain,
    Forgive the gods the rest, and stand confined
    To health of body, and content of mind;
    A soul, that can securely death defy,
    And count it nature's privilege to die;
    Serene and manly, hardened to sustain
    The load of life, and exercised in pain;
    Guiltless of hate, and proof against desire,
    That all things weighs, and nothing can admire;
    That dares prefer the toils of Hercules,
    To dalliance, banquet, and ignoble ease.
      The path to peace is virtue: what I show,
    Thyself may freely on thyself bestow;
    Fortune was never worshipped by the wise,
    But, set aloft by fools, usurps the skies.



THE

SIXTEENTH SATIRE

OF

JUVENAL.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _The Poet in this satire proves, that the condition of a
      soldier is much better than that of a countryman; first,
      because a countryman, however affronted, provoked, and
      struck himself, dares not strike a soldier, who is only
      to be judged by a court-martial; and, by the law of
      Camillus, which obliges him not to quarrel without the
      trenches, he is also assured to have a speedy hearing,
      and quick dispatch; whereas, the townsman, or peasant, is
      delayed in his suit by frivolous pretences, and not sure
      of justice when he is heard in the court. The soldier
      is also privileged to make a will, and to give away his
      estate, which he got in war, to whom he pleases, without
      consideration of parentage, or relations, which is denied
      to all other Romans. This satire was written by Juvenal,
      when he was a commander in Egypt: it is certainly his,
      though I think it not finished. And if it be well observed,
      you will find he intended an invective against a standing
      army._

    What vast prerogatives, my Gallus, are
    Accruing to the mighty man of war!
    For if into a lucky camp I light,                                  }
    Though raw in arms, and yet afraid to fight,                       }
    Befriend me my good stars, and all goes right.                     }
    One happy hour is to a soldier better,
    Than mother Juno's[167] recommending letter,
    Or Venus, when to Mars she would prefer
    My suit, and own the kindness done to her.[168]
      See what our common privileges are;
    As, first, no saucy citizen shall dare
    To strike a soldier, nor, when struck, resent
    The wrong, for fear of farther punishment.
    Not though his teeth are beaten out, his eyes
    Hang by a string, in bumps his forehead rise,
    Shall he presume to mention his disgrace,
    Or beg amends for his demolished face.
    A booted judge shall sit to try his cause,
    Not by the statute, but by martial laws;
    Which old Camillus ordered, to confine
    The brawls of soldiers to the trench and line:
    A wise provision; and from thence 'tis clear,
    That officers a soldier's cause should hear;
    And taking cognizance of wrongs received,
    An honest man may hope to be relieved.
    So far 'tis well; but with a general cry,
    The regiment will rise in mutiny,
    The freedom of their fellow-rogue demand,
    And, if refused, will threaten to disband.
    Withdraw thy action, and depart in peace,
    The remedy is worse than the disease.
    This cause is worthy him, who in the hall
    Would for his fee, and for his client, bawl:[169]
    But would'st thou, friend, who hast two legs alone,
    (Which, heaven be praised, thou yet may'st call thy own,)
    Would'st thou to run the gauntlet these expose
    To a whole company of hob-nailed shoes?[170]
    Sure the good-breeding of wise citizens
    Should teach them more good-nature to their shins.
      Besides, whom canst thou think so much thy friend,
    Who dares appear thy business to defend?
    Dry up thy tears, and pocket up the abuse,                         }
    Nor put thy friend to make a bad excuse;                           }
    The judge cries out, "Your evidence produce."                      }
    Will he, who saw the soldier's mutton-fist,
    And saw thee mauled, appear within the list,
    To witness truth? When I see one so brave,
    The dead, think I, are risen from the grave;
    And with their long spade beards, and matted hair,
    Our honest ancestors are come to take the air.
    Against a clown, with more security,
    A witness may be brought to swear a lie,
    Than, though his evidence be full and fair,
    To vouch a truth against a man of war.
      More benefits remain, and claimed as rights,
    Which are a standing army's perquisites.
    If any rogue vexatious suits advance
    Against me for my known inheritance,
    Enter by violence my fruitful grounds,
    Or take the sacred land-mark[171] from my bounds,
    Those bounds, which with procession and with prayer,
    And offered cakes, have been my annual care;
    Or if my debtors do not keep their day,
    Deny their hands, and then refuse to pay;
    I must with patience all the terms attend,
    Among the common causes that depend,
    Till mine is called; and that long-looked-for day
    Is still encumbered with some new delay;
    Perhaps the cloth of state is only spread,[172]
    Some of the quorum may be sick a-bed;
    That judge is hot, and doffs his gown, while this
    O'er night was bowsy, and goes out to piss:
    So many rubs appear, the time is gone
    For hearing, and the tedious suit goes on;
    But buft and beltmen never know these cares,
    No time, nor trick of law, their action bars:
    Their cause they to an easier issue put;
    They will be heard, or they lug out, and cut.
      Another branch of their revenue still                            }
    Remains, beyond their boundless right to kill,--                   }
    Their father yet alive, impowered to make a will.[173]             }
    For what their prowess gained, the law declares
    Is to themselves alone, and to their heirs:
    No share of that goes back to the begetter,
    But if the son fights well, and plunders better,
    Like stout Coranus, his old shaking sire
    Does a remembrance in his will desire,
    Inquisitive of fights, and longs in vain
    To find him in the number of the slain:
    But still he lives, and rising by the war,
    Enjoys his gains, and has enough to spare;
    For 'tis a noble general's prudent part
    To cherish valour, and reward desert;
    Let him be daub'd with lace, live high, and whore;
    Sometimes be lousy, but be never poor.





TRANSLATIONS

FROM

PERSIUS.




THE

FIRST SATIRE

OF

PERSIUS.


                        ARGUMENT OF THE PROLOGUE

                          TO THE FIRST SATIRE.

    _The design of the author was to conceal his name and quality.
      He lived in the dangerous times of the tyrant Nero, and
      aims particularly at him in most of his Satires. For which
      reason, though he was a Roman knight, and of a plentiful
      fortune, he would appear in this Prologue but a beggarly
      poet, who writes for bread. After this, he breaks into the
      business of the First Satire; which is chiefly to decry the
      poetry then in fashion, and the impudence of those who were
      endeavouring to pass their stuff upon the world._


PROLOGUE

TO

THE FIRST SATIRE.

    I never did on cleft Parnassus dream,
    Nor taste the sacred Heliconian stream;[174]
    Nor can remember when my brain, inspired,
    Was by the Muses into madness fired.
    My share in pale Pyrene[175] I resign,
    And claim no part in all the mighty Nine.
    Statues, with winding ivy crowned,[176] belong
    To nobler poets, for a nobler song;
    Heedless of verse, and hopeless of the crown,                      }
    Scarce half a wit, and more than half a clown,                     }
    Before the shrine[177] I lay my rugged numbers down.               }
    Who taught the parrot human notes to try,
    Or with a voice endued the chattering pye?
    'Twas witty Want, fierce hunger to appease;
    Want taught their masters, and their masters these.
    Let gain, that gilded bait, be hung on high,
    The hungry witlings have it in their eye;
    Pyes, crows, and daws, poetic presents bring;
    You say they squeak, but they will swear they sing.


THE

FIRST SATIRE.

IN DIALOGUE BETWIXT

THE POET AND HIS FRIEND, OR MONITOR.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _I need not repeat, that the chief aim of the author is against
      bad poets in this Satire. But I must add, that he includes
      also bad orators, who began at that time (as Petronius
      in the beginning of his book tells us) to enervate manly
      eloquence by tropes and figures, ill placed, and worse
      applied. Amongst the poets, Persius covertly strikes
      at Nero; some of whose verses he recites with scorn and
      indignation. He also takes notice of the noblemen, and
      their abominable poetry, who, in the luxury of their
      fortunes, set up for wits and judges. The Satire is in
      dialogue betwixt the author, and his friend, or monitor;
      who dissuades him from this dangerous attempt of exposing
      great men. But Persius, who is of a free spirit, and has
      not forgotten that Rome was once a commonwealth, breaks
      through all those difficulties, and boldly arraigns the
      false judgment of the age in which he lives. The reader may
      observe, that our poet was a Stoic philosopher; and that
      all his moral sentences, both here and in all the rest of
      his Satires, are drawn from the dogmas of that sect._


                                PERSIUS.

    How anxious are our cares, and yet how vain
    The bent of our desires!

                                FRIEND.

    Thy spleen contain;
    For none will read thy satires.?

                                PERSIUS.

    This to me?

                                FRIEND.

    None, or, what's next to none, but two or three.
    'Tis hard, I grant.

                                PERSIUS.

    'Tis nothing; I can bear,
    That paltry scribblers have the public ear;
    That this vast universal fool, the town,
    Should cry up Labeo's stuff,[178] and cry me down.
    They damn themselves; nor will my muse descend
    To clap with such, who fools and knaves commend:
    Their smiles and censures are to me the same;
    I care not what they praise, or what they blame.
    In full assemblies let the crowd prevail;
    I weigh no merit by the common scale.
    The conscience is the test of every mind;
    "Seek not thyself, without thyself, to find."
    But where's that Roman----Somewhat I would say,
    But fear----let fear, for once, to truth give way.
    Truth lends the Stoic courage; when I look
    On human acts, and read in Nature's book,
    From the first pastimes of our infant age,
    To elder cares, and man's severer page;
    When stern as tutors, and as uncles hard,
    We lash the pupil, and defraud the ward,
    Then, then I say--or would say, if I durst--
    But, thus provoked, I must speak out, or burst.

                                FRIEND.

    Once more forbear.

                                PERSIUS.

    I cannot rule my spleen;
    My scorn rebels, and tickles me within.
      First, to begin at home:--Our authors write
    In lonely rooms, secured from public sight;
    Whether in prose, or verse, 'tis all the same,
    The prose is fustian, and the numbers lame;
    All noise, and empty pomp, a storm of words,
    Labouring with sound, that little sense affords.
    They comb, and then they order every hair;                         }
    A gown, or white, or scoured to whiteness, wear,                   }
    A birth-day jewel bobbing at their ear;[179]                       }
    Next, gargle well their throats; and, thus prepared,
    They mount, a God's name, to be seen and heard;
    From their high scaffold, with a trumpet cheek,
    And ogling all their audience ere they speak.
    The nauseous nobles, even the chief of Rome,
    With gaping mouths to these rehearsals come,
    And pant with pleasure, when some lusty line
    The marrow pierces, and invades the chine;
    At open fulsome bawdry they rejoice,
    And slimy jests applaud with broken voice.
    Base prostitute! thus dost thou gain thy bread?
    Thus dost thou feed their ears, and thus art fed?
    At his own filthy stuff he grins and brays,
    And gives the sign where he expects their praise.
      Why have I learned, sayst thou, if thus confined,
    I choke the noble vigour of my mind?
    Know, my wild fig-tree, which in rocks is bred,
    Will split the quarry, and shoot out the head.[180]
    Fine fruits of learning! old ambitious fool,
    Darest thou apply that adage of the school,
    As if 'tis nothing worth that lies concealed,
    And "science is not science till revealed?"
    Oh, but 'tis brave to be admired, to see
    The crowd, with pointing fingers, cry,--That's he;
    That's he, whose wonderous poem is become
    A lecture for the noble youth of Rome!
    Who, by their fathers, is at feasts renowned,
    And often quoted when the bowls go round.
    Full gorged and flushed, they wantonly rehearse,
    And add to wine the luxury of verse.
    One, clad in purple, not to lose his time,
    Eats and recites some lamentable rhyme;
    Some senseless Phillis, in a broken note,
    Snuffling at nose, and croaking in his throat.
    Then graciously the mellow audience nod;
    Is not the immortal author made a god?
    Are not his manes blest, such praise to have?
    Lies not the turf more lightly on his grave?
    And roses (while his loud applause they sing)
    Stand ready from his sepulchre to spring?
      All these, you cry, but light objections are,
    Mere malice, and you drive the jest too far:
    For does there breathe a man, who can reject
    A general fame, and his own lines neglect?
    In cedar tablets[181] worthy to appear,                            }
    That need not fish, or frankincense, to fear?                      }
      Thou, whom I make the adverse part to bear,                      }
    Be answered thus:--If I by chance succeed
    In what I write, (and that's a chance indeed,)
    Know, I am not so stupid, or so hard,
    Not to feel praise, or fame's deserved reward;
    But this I cannot grant, that thy applause
    Is my work's ultimate, or only cause.
    Prudence can ne'er propose so mean a prize;
    For mark what vanity within it lies.
    Like Labeo's Iliads, in whose verse is found
    Nothing but trifling care, and empty sound;
    Such little elegies as nobles write,
    Who would be poets, in Apollo's spite.
    Them and their woeful works the Muse defies;
    Products of citron beds,[182] and golden canopies.
    To give thee all thy due, thou hast the heart                      }
    To make a supper, with a fine desert,                              }
    And to thy thread-bare friend a cast old suit impart.              }
      Thus bribed, thou thus bespeak'st him--Tell me, friend,
    (For I love truth, nor can plain speech offend,)
    What says the world of me and of my muse?
      The poor dare nothing tell but flattering news;
    But shall I speak? Thy verse is wretched rhyme,
    And all thy labours are but loss of time.
    Thy strutting belly swells, thy paunch is high;
    Thou writ'st not, but thou pissest poetry.
      All authors to their own defects are blind;
    Hadst thou but, Janus-like,[183] a face behind,
    To see the people, what splay-mouths they make;
    To mark their fingers, pointed at thy back;
    Their tongues lolled out, a foot beyond the pitch,
    When most athirst, of an Apulian bitch:
    But noble scribblers are with flattery fed,
    For none dare find their faults, who eat their bread.
    To pass the poets of patrician blood,
    What is't the common reader takes for good?
    The verse in fashion is, when numbers flow,
    Soft without sense, and without spirit slow;
    So smooth and equal, that no sight can find
    The rivet, where the polished piece was joined;
    So even all, with such a steady view,
    As if he shut one eye to level true.
    Whether the vulgar vice his satire stings,
    The people's riots, or the rage of kings,
    The gentle poet is alike in all;
    His reader hopes no rise, and fears no fall.

                                FRIEND.

    Hourly we see some raw pin-feathered thing
    Attempt to mount, and fights and heroes sing;
    Who for false quantities was whipt at school
    But t'other day, and breaking grammar-rule;
    Whose trivial art was never tried above
    The bare description of a native grove;
    Who knows not how to praise the country store,                     }
    The feasts, the baskets, nor the fatted boar,                      }
    Nor paint the flowery fields that paint themselves before;         }
    Where Romulus was bred, and Quintius born,[184]
    Whose shining plough-share was in furrows worn,
    Met by his trembling wife returning home,
    And rustically joyed, as chief of Rome:
    She wiped the sweat from the Dictator's brow,                      }
    And o'er his back his robe did rudely throw;                       }
    The lictors bore in state their lord's triumphant plough.          }
      Some love to hear the fustian poet roar,
    And some on antiquated authors pore;
    Rummage for sense, and think those only good
    Who labour most, and least are understood.
    When thou shalt see the blear-eyed fathers teach
    Their sons this harsh and mouldy sort of speech,
    Or others new affected ways to try,
    Of wanton smoothness, female poetry;
    One would enquire from whence this motley style
    Did first our Roman purity defile.
    For our old dotards cannot keep their seat,
    But leap and catch at all that's obsolete.
      Others, by foolish ostentation led,
    When called before the bar, to save their head,
    Bring trifling tropes, instead of solid sense,
    And mind their figures more than their defence;
    Are pleased to hear their thick-skulled judges cry,
    Well moved, oh finely said, and decently!
    Theft (says the accuser) to thy charge I lay,
    O Pedius: what does gentle Pedius say?
    Studious to please the genius of the times,
    With periods, points, and tropes,[185] he slurs his crimes:
    "He robbed not, but he borrowed from the poor,
    And took but with intention to restore."
    He lards with flourishes his long harangue;
    'Tis fine, say'st thou;--what, to be praised, and hang?
    Effeminate Roman, shall such stuff prevail
    To tickle thee, and make thee wag thy tail?
    Say, should a shipwrecked sailor sing his woe,
    Wouldst thou be moved to pity, or bestow
    An alms? What's more preposterous than to see
    A merry beggar? Mirth in misery?

                                PERSIUS.

      He seems a trap for charity to lay,
    And cons, by night, his lesson for the day.

                                FRIEND.

      But to raw numbers, and unfinished verse,
    Sweet sound is added now, to make it terse:
    "'Tis tagged with rhyme, like Berecynthian Atys,
    The mid-part chimes with art, which never flat is.[186]
    The dolphin brave, that cuts the liquid wave,
    Or he who in his line can chine the long-ribbed Appennine."

                                PERSIUS.

    All this is doggrel stuff.

                                FRIEND.

      What if I bring
    A nobler verse? "Arms and the man I sing."

                                PERSIUS.

      Why name you Virgil with such fops as these?
    He's truly great, and must for ever please:
    Not fierce, but aweful, is his manly page;
    Bold is his strength, but sober is his rage.

                                FRIEND.

      What poems think you soft, and to be read
    With languishing regards, and bending head?

                                PERSIUS.

    "Their crooked horns the Mimallonian crew
    With blasts inspired;[187] and Bassaris, who slew
    The scornful calf, with sword advanced on high,
    Made from his neck his haughty head to fly:
    And Mænas, when with ivy bridles bound,                            }
    She led the spotted lynx, then Evion rung around;                  }
    Evion from woods and floods repairing echo's sound."               }
      Could such rude lines a Roman mouth become,
    Were any manly greatness left in Rome?
    Mænas and Atys[188] in the mouth were bred,
    And never hatched within the labouring head;
    No blood from bitten nails those poems drew,
    But churned, like spittle, from the lips they flew.

                                FRIEND.

      'Tis fustian all; 'tis execrably bad;
    But if they will be fools, must you be mad?
    Your satires, let me tell you, are too fierce;
    The great will never bear so blunt a verse.
    Their doors are barred against a bitter flout;
    Snarl, if you please, but you shall snarl without.
    Expect such pay as railing rhymes deserve;
    You're in a very hopeful way to starve.

                                PERSIUS.

      Rather than so, uncensured let them be;
    All, all is admirably well, for me.
    My harmless rhyme shall 'scape the dire disgrace
    Of common-shoars, and every pissing-place.
    Two painted serpents[189] shall on high appear;
    'Tis holy ground; you must not urine here.
    This shall be writ, to fright the fry away,
    Who draw their little baubles when they play.
      Yet old Lucilius[190] never feared the times,
    But lashed the city, and dissected crimes.
    Mutius and Lupus both by name he brought;
    He mouthed them, and betwixt his grinders caught.
    Unlike in method, with concealed design,
    Did crafty Horace his low numbers join;
    And, with a sly insinuating grace,
    Laughed at his friend, and looked him in the face;
    Would raise a blush where secret vice he found,
    And tickle while he gently probed the wound;
    With seeming innocence the crowd beguiled,
    But made the desperate passes when he smiled.
      Could he do this, and is my muse controuled
    By servile awe? Born free, and not be bold?
    At least, I'll dig a hole within the ground,
    And to the trusty earth commit the sound;
    The reeds shall tell you what the poet fears,
    "King Midas has a snout, and asses ears."[191]
    This mean conceit, this darling mystery,
    Which thou think'st nothing, friend, thou shalt not buy;
    Nor will I change for all the flashy wit,
    That flattering Labeo in his Iliads writ.
      Thou, if there be a thou in this base town,
    Who dares, with angry Eupolis, to frown;
    He who, with bold Cratinus, is inspired
    With zeal,[192] and equal indignation fired;
    Who at enormous villainy turns pale,
    And steers against it with a full-blown sail,
    Like Aristophanes, let him but smile
    On this my honest work, though writ in homely style;
    And if two lines or three in all the vein
    Appear less drossy, read those lines again.
    May they perform their author's just intent,
    Glow in thy ears, and in thy breast ferment!
    But from the reading of my book and me,
    Be far, ye foes of virtuous poverty;
    Who fortune's fault upon the poor can throw,[193]
    Point at the tattered coat, and ragged shoe;
    Lay nature's failings to their charge, and jeer
    The dim weak eye-sight when the mind is clear;
    When thou thyself, thus insolent in state,
    Art but, perhaps, some country magistrate,
    Whose power extends no farther than to speak
    Big on the bench, and scanty weights to break.
      Him also for my censor I disdain,
    Who thinks all science, as all virtue, vain;
    Who counts geometry, and numbers toys,
    And with his foot the sacred dust destroys;[194]
    Whose pleasure is to see a strumpet tear
    A cynick's beard, and lug him by the hair.
    Such all the morning to the pleadings run;                         }
    But when the business of the day is done,                          }
    On dice, and drink, and drabs, they spend their afternoon.         }



THE

SECOND SATIRE

OF

PERSIUS.

DEDICATED TO HIS FRIEND

PLOTIUS MACRINUS,

ON HIS BIRTH-DAY.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _This Satire contains a most grave and philosophical argument,
      concerning prayers and wishes. Undoubtedly it gave
      occasion to Juvenal's tenth satire; and both of them had
      their original from one of Plato's dialogues, called the
      "Second Alcibiades." Our author has induced it with great
      mystery of art, by taking his rise from the birth-day of
      his friend; on which occasions, prayers were made, and
      sacrifices offered by the native. Persius, commending,
      first, the purity of his friend's vows, descends to the
      impious and immoral requests of others. The satire is
      divided into three parts. The first is the exordium to
      Macrinus, which the poet confines within the compass of
      four verses: the second relates to the matter of the prayers
      and vows, and an enumeration of those things, wherein
      men commonly sinned against right reason, and offended
      in their requests: the third part consists in showing
      the repugnances of those prayers and wishes, to those of
      other men, and inconsistencies with themselves. He shows
      the original of these vows, and sharply inveighs against
      them; and, lastly, not only corrects the false opinion of
      mankind concerning them, but gives the true doctrine of
      all addresses made to heaven, and how they may be made
      acceptable to the powers above, in excellent precepts, and
      more worthy of a Christian than a Heathen._


    Let this auspicious morning be exprest
    With a white stone,[195] distinguished from the rest,
    White as thy fame, and as thy honour clear,
    And let new joys attend on thy new added year.
    Indulge thy genius, and o'erflow thy soul,
    Till thy wit sparkle, like the cheerful bowl.
    Pray; for thy prayers the test of heaven will bear,
    Nor need'st thou take the gods aside to hear;
    While others, even the mighty men of Rome,
    Big swelled with mischief, to the temples come,
    And in low murmurs, and with costly smoke,
    Heaven's help to prosper their black vows, invoke:
    So boldly to the gods mankind reveal
    What from each other they, for shame, conceal.
    Give me good fame, ye powers, and make me just;
    Thus much the rogue to public ears will trust:
    In private then,--When wilt thou, mighty Jove;
    My wealthy uncle from this world remove?
    Or, O thou Thunderer's son, great Hercules,
    That once thy bounteous deity would please
    To guide my rake upon the chinking sound
    Of some vast treasure, hidden under ground![196]
      O were my pupil fairly knocked o' the head,
    I should possess the estate if he were dead!
    He's so far gone with rickets, and with the evil,
    That one small dose would send him to the devil.
      This is my neighbour Nerius his third spouse,
    Of whom in happy time he rids his house;
    But my eternal wife!--Grant, heaven, I may
    Survive to see the fellow of this day!
      Thus, that thou may'st the better bring about
    Thy wishes, thou art wickedly devout;
    In Tyber ducking thrice, by break of day,
    To wash the obscenities of night away.[197]
    But, pr'ythee, tell me, ('tis a small request,)
    With what ill thoughts of Jove art thou possest?
    Wouldst thou prefer him to some man? Suppose
    I dipped among the worst, and Staius chose?
    Which of the two would thy wise head declare
    The trustier tutor to an orphan heir?
    Or, put it thus:--Unfold to Staius, straight,
    What to Jove's ear thou didst impart of late:
    He'll stare, and O, good Jupiter! will cry,
    Canst thou indulge him in this villainy?
    And think'st thou Jove himself with patience then
    Can hear a prayer condemned by wicked men?
    That, void of care, he lolls supine in state,
    And leaves his business to be done by fate,
    Because his thunder splits some burly tree,
    And is not darted at thy house and thee;
    Or that his vengeance falls not at the time,
    Just at the perpetration of thy crime,
    And makes thee a sad object of our eyes,
    Fit for Ergenna's prayer and sacrifice?[198]
    What well-fed offering to appease the God,
    What powerful present to procure a nod,
    Hast thou in store? What bribe hast thou prepared,
    To pull him, thus unpunished, by the beard?
      Our superstitions with our life begin;[199]
    The obscene old grandam, or the next of kin,
    The new-born infant from the cradle takes,
    And, first, of spittle a lustration makes;
    Then in the spawl her middle-finger dips,
    Anoints the temples, forehead, and the lips,
    Pretending force of magic to prevent,
    By virtue of her nasty excrement;
    Then dandles him with many a muttered prayer,
    That heaven would make him some rich miser's heir,
    Lucky to ladies, and in time a king;
    Which to ensure, she adds a length of navel-string.
    But no fond nurse is fit to make a prayer,
    And Jove, if Jove be wise, will never hear;
    Not though she prays in white, with lifted hands.
    A body made of brass the crone demands
    For her loved nursling, strung with nerves of wire,
    Tough to the last, and with no toil to tire;
    Unconscionable vows, which, when we use,
    We teach the gods, in reason, to refuse.
    Suppose they were indulgent to thy wish,
    Yet the fat entrails in the spacious dish
    Would stop the grant; the very over-care
    And nauseous pomp, would hinder half the prayer.
    Thou hop'st with sacrifice of oxen slain
    To compass wealth, and bribe the god of gain
    To give thee flocks and herds, with large increase;
    Fool! to expect them from a bullock's grease!
    And think'st that when the fattened flames aspire,
    Thou see'st the accomplishment of thy desire!
    Now, now, my bearded harvest gilds the plain,                      }
    The scanty folds can scarce my sheep contain,                      }
    And showers of gold come pouring in amain!                         }
    Thus dreams the wretch, and vainly thus dreams on,
    Till his lank purse declares his money gone.
      Should I present them with rare figured plate,
    Or gold as rich in workmanship as weight;
    O how thy rising heart would throb and beat,
    And thy left side, with trembling pleasure, sweat!
    Thou measur'st by thyself the powers divine;
    Thy gods are burnished gold, and silver is their shrine.
    The puny godlings of inferior race,
    Whose humble statues are content with brass,
    Should some of these, in visions purged from phlegm,
    Foretel events, or in a morning dream;[200]
    Even those thou would'st in veneration hold,
    And, if not faces, give them beards of gold.
    The priests in temples now no longer care
    For Saturn's brass,[201] or Numa's earthen ware;[202]
    Or vestal urns, in each religious rite;
    This wicked gold has put them all to flight.
    O souls, in whom no heavenly fire is found,
    Fat minds, and ever grovelling on the ground!
    We bring our manners to the blest abodes,
    And think what pleases us must please the gods.
    Of oil and cassia one the ingredients takes,
    And, of the mixture, a rich ointment makes;
    Another finds the way to dye in grain,
    And makes Calabrian wool[203] receive the Tyrian stain;
    Or from the shells their orient treasure takes,
    Or for their golden ore in rivers rakes,
    Then melts the mass. All these are vanities,
    Yet still some profit from their pains may rise:
    But tell me, priest, if I may be so bold,
    What are the gods the better for this gold?
    The wretch, that offers from his wealthy store
    These presents, bribes the powers to give him more;
    As maids to Venus offer baby-toys,[204]
    To bless the marriage-bed with girls and boys.
    But let us for the gods a gift prepare,
    Which the great man's great chargers cannot bear;
    A soul, where laws, both human and divine,
    In practice more than speculation shine;
    A genuine virtue, of a vigorous kind,
    Pure in the last recesses of the mind:
    When with such offerings to the gods I come,
    A cake, thus given, is worth a hecatomb.[205]

FOOTNOTES:

[195] Note I.

[196] Note II.

[197] Note III.

[198] Note IV.

[199] Note V.

[200] Note VI.

[201] Note VII.

[202] Note VIII.

[203] Note IX.

[204] Note X.

[205] Note XI.




NOTES

ON

TRANSLATIONS FROM PERSIUS.

SATIRE II.


Note I.

    _Let this auspicious morning be exprest
    With a white stone._----P. 222.

The Romans were used to mark their fortunate days, or any thing that
luckily befel them, with a white stone, which they had from the island
Creta, and their unfortunate with a coal.


Note II.

            ----_Great Hercules,
    That once thy bounteous deity would please
    To guide my rake upon the chinking sound
    Of some vast treasure, hidden under ground._--P. 222.

Hercules was thought to have the key and power of bestowing all hidden
treasure.


Note III.

    _In Tyber ducking thrice, by break of day,
    To wash the obscenities of night away._--P. 223.

The ancients thought themselves tainted and polluted by night itself,
as well as bad dreams in the night; and therefore purified themselves
by washing their heads and hands every morning, which custom the Turks
observe to this day.


Note IV.

        _Fit for Ergenna's prayer and sacrifice_.--P. 223.

When any one was thunderstruck, the soothsayer (who is here called
Ergenna) immediately repaired to the place, to expiate the displeasure
of the gods, by sacrificing two sheep.


Note V.

         _Our superstitions with our life begin_.--P. 223.

The poet laughs at the superstitious ceremonies which the old women
made use of in their lustration, or purification days, when they named
their children, which was done on the eighth day to females, and on the
ninth to males.


Note VI.

    _Should some of these, in visions purged from phlegm,
    Foretel events, or in a morning dream._--P. 225.

It was the opinion both of Grecians and Romans, that the gods, in
visions and dreams, often revealed to their favourites a cure for
their diseases, and sometimes those of others. Thus Alexander dreamed
of an herb which cured Ptolemy. These gods were principally Apollo
and Esculapius; but, in aftertimes, the same virtue and good-will was
attributed to Isis and Osiris. Which brings to my remembrance an odd
passage in Sir Thomas Brown's Religio Medici, or in his Vulgar Errors;
the sense whereof is, that we are beholden, for many of our discoveries
in physic, to the courteous revelation of spirits. By the expression,
of "visions purged from phlegm," our author means such dreams or
visions as proceed not from natural causes, or humours of the body, but
such as are sent from heaven; and are, therefore, certain remedies.


Note VII.

    _The priests in temples, now no longer care
    For Saturn's brass._--P. 225.

Brazen vessels, in which the public treasures of the Romans were kept:
it may be the poet means only old vessels, which were called #Kronia#,
from the Greek name of Saturn. Note also, that the Roman treasury was
in the temple of Saturn.


Note VIII.

              ----_Or Numa's earthen ware._--P. 225.

Under Numa, the second king of Rome, and for a long time after him,
the holy vessels for sacrifice were of earthen-ware; according to the
superstitious rites which were introduced by the same Numa: though
afterwards, when Memmius had taken Corinth, and Paulus Emilius had
conquered Macedonia, luxury began amongst the Romans, and then their
utensils of devotion were of gold and silver, &c.


Note IX.

             _And makes Calabrian wool, &c._--P. 225.

The wool of Calabria was of the finest sort in Italy, as Juvenal also
tells us. The Tyrian stain is the purple colour dyed at Tyrus; and I
suppose, but dare not positively affirm, that the richest of that dye
was nearest our crimson, and not scarlet, or that other colour more
approaching to the blue. I have not room to justify my conjecture.


Note X.

           _As maids to Venus offer baby-toys._--P. 225.

Those baby-toys were little babies, or poppets, as we call them; in
Latin, pupæ; which the girls, when they came to the age of puberty, or
child bearing, offered to Venus; as the boys, at fourteen or fifteen,
offered their _bullæ_, or bosses.


Note XI.

        _A cake, thus given, is worth a hecatomb._--P. 226.

A cake of barley, or coarse wheat-meal, with the bran in it. The
meaning is, that God is pleased with the pure and spotless heart of
the offerer, and not with the riches of the offering. Laberius, in the
fragments of his "Mimes," has a verse like this--_Puras, Deus, non
plenas aspicit manus_.--What I had forgotten before, in its due place,
I must here tell the reader, that the first half of this satire was
translated by one of my sons, now in Italy; but I thought so well of
it, that I let it pass without any alteration.




THE

THIRD SATIRE

OF

PERSIUS.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _Our author has made two Satires concerning study, the first
      and the third: the first related to men; this to young
      students, whom he desired to be educated in the Stoic
      philosophy. He himself sustains the person of the master,
      or preceptor, in this admirable Satire, where he upbraids
      the youth of sloth, and negligence in learning. Yet he
      begins with one scholar reproaching his fellow-students
      with late rising to their books. After which, he takes
      upon him the other part of the teacher; and, addressing
      himself particularly to young noblemen, tells them, that,
      by reason of their high birth, and the great possessions
      of their fathers, they are careless of adorning their
      minds with precepts of moral philosophy: and, withal,
      inculcates to them the miseries which will attend them
      in the whole course of their life, if they do not apply
      themselves betimes to the knowledge of virtue, and the end
      of their creation, which he pathetically insinuates to them.
      The title of this satire, in some ancient manuscripts,
      was, "the Reproach of Idleness;" though in others of the
      scholiasts it is inscribed, "Against the Luxury and Vices
      of the Rich." In both of which, the intention of the poet
      is pursued, but principally in the former._

    [I remember I translated this satire when I was a king's
      scholar at Westminster school, for a Thursday-night's
      exercise; and believe, that it, and many other of my
      exercises of this nature in English verse, are still in the
      hands of my learned master, the Rev. Dr Busby.]


    Is this thy daily course? The glaring sun                          }
    Breaks in at every chink; the cattle run                           }
    To shades, and noon-tide rays of summer shun;                      }
    Yet plunged in sloth we lie, and snore supine,
    As filled with fumes of undigested wine.
      This grave advice some sober student bears,
    And loudly rings it in his fellow's ears.
    The yawning youth, scarce half awake, essays
    His lazy limbs and dozy head to raise;
    Then rubs his gummy eyes, and scrubs his pate,
    And cries,--I thought it had not been so late!
    My clothes, make haste!--why then, if none be near,
    He mutters, first, and then begins to swear;
    And brays aloud, with a more clamorous note,
    Than an Arcadian ass can stretch his throat.
      With much ado, his book before him laid,
    And parchment with the smoother side displayed,[206]
    He takes the papers; lays them down again,
    And with unwilling fingers tries the pen.
    Some peevish quarrel straight he strives to pick,
    His quill writes double, or his ink's too thick;
    Infuse more water,--now 'tis grown so thin,
    It sinks, nor can the characters be seen.
      O wretch, and still more wretched every day!
    Are mortals born to sleep their lives away?
    Go back to what thy infancy began,
    Thou, who wert never meant to be a man;
    Eat pap and spoon-meat, for thy gewgaws cry;
    Be sullen, and refuse the lullaby.
    No more accuse thy pen; but charge the crime
    On native sloth, and negligence of time.
    Think'st thou thy master, or thy friends, to cheat?
    Fool, 'tis thyself, and that's a worse deceit.
    Beware the public laughter of the town;
    Thou spring'st a leak already in thy crown;
    A flaw is in thy ill-baked vessel found;
    'Tis hollow, and returns a jarring sound.
      Yet thy moist clay is pliant to command,
    Unwrought, and easy to the potter's hand:
    Now take the mould; now bend thy mind to feel
    The first sharp motions of the forming wheel.
      But thou hast land; a country seat, secure
    By a just title; costly furniture;
    A fuming pan thy Lares to appease:[207]
    What need of learning when a man's at ease?
    If this be not enough to swell thy soul,
    Then please thy pride, and search the herald's roll,
    Where thou shalt find thy famous pedigree                          }
    Drawn from the root of some old Tuscan tree,[208]                  }
    And thou, a thousand off, a fool of long degree;                   }
    Who, clad in purple, can'st thy censor greet,[209]
    And loudly call him cousin in the street.
      Such pageantry be to the people shown:
    There boast thy horse's trappings, and thy own.
    I know thee to thy bottom, from within
    Thy shallow centre, to the utmost skin:
    Dost thou not blush to live so like a beast,
    So trim, so dissolute, so loosely drest?
      But 'tis in vain; the wretch is drenched too deep,
    His soul is stupid, and his heart asleep;
    Fattened in vice, so callous, and so gross,
    He sins, and sees not, senseless of his loss.
    Down goes the wretch at once, unskilled to swim,
    Hopeless to bubble up, and reach the water's brim.
      Great father of the gods, when for our crimes
    Thou send'st some heavy judgment on the times;
    Some tyrant-king, the terror of his age,
    The type, and true vicegerent of thy rage;
    Thus punish him: set virtue in his sight,
    With all her charms, adorned with all her graces bright;
    But set her distant, make him pale to see
    His gains outweighed by lost felicity!
      Sicilian tortures, and the brazen bull,[210]
    Are emblems, rather than express the full
    Of what he feels; yet what he fears is more:
    The wretch, who, sitting at his plenteous board,
    Looked up, and viewed on high the pointed sword
    Hang o'er his head, and hanging by a twine,
    Did with less dread, and more securely dine.[211]
    Even in his sleep he starts, and fears the knife,
    And, trembling, in his arms takes his accomplice wife;
    Down, down he goes; and from his darling friend
    Conceals the woes his guilty dreams portend.
      When I was young, I, like a lazy fool,
    Would blear my eyes with oil, to stay from school:
    Averse from pains, and loth to learn the part
    Of Cato, dying with a dauntless heart;
    Though much my master that stern virtue praised,
    Which o'er the vanquisher the vanquished raised;
    And my pleased father came with pride to see
    His boy defend the Roman liberty.
      But then my study was to cog the dice,
    And dexterously to throw the lucky sice;
    To shun ames-ace, that swept my stakes away,                       }
    And watch the box, for fear they should convey                     }
    False bones, and put upon me in the play;                          }
    Careful, besides, the whirling top to whip,
    And drive her giddy, till she fell asleep.
      Thy years are ripe, nor art thou yet to learn
    What's good or ill, and both their ends discern:
    Thou in the Stoic-porch,[212] severely bred,
    Hast heard the dogmas of great Zeno read;
    Where on the walls, by Polygnotus' hand,
    The conquered Medians in trunk-breeches stand;[213]
    Where the shorn youth to midnight lectures rise,
    Roused from their slumbers to be early wise;
    Where the coarse cake, and homely husks of beans,
    From pampering riot the young stomach weans;
    And where the Samian Y directs thy steps to run
    To Virtue's narrow steep, and broad-way Vice to shun.[214]
    And yet thou snor'st, thou draw'st thy drunken breath,
    Sour with debauch, and sleep'st the sleep of death:
    Thy chaps are fallen, and thy frame disjoined;
    Thy body is dissolved as is thy mind.
      Hast thou not yet proposed some certain end,
    To which thy life, thy every act, may tend?
    Hast thou no mark, at which to bend thy bow?
    Or, like a boy, pursuest the carrion crow
    With pellets, and with stones, from tree to tree,
    A fruitless toil, and livest _extempore_?
    Watch the disease in time; for when within
    The dropsy rages, and extends the skin,
    In vain for hellebore the patient cries,
    And fees the doctor, but too late is wise;
    Too late, for cure he proffers half his wealth;
    Conquest and Guibbons[215] cannot give him health.
    Learn, wretches, learn the motions of the mind,                    }
    Why you were made, for what you were designed,                     }
    And the great moral end of human kind.                             }
    Study thyself, what rank, or what degree,
    The wise Creator has ordained for thee;
    And all the offices of that estate
    Perform, and with thy prudence guide thy fate.
    Pray justly to be heard, nor more desire
    Than what the decencies of life require.
    Learn what thou owest thy country, and thy friend;
    What's requisite to spare, and what to spend:
    Learn this; and after, envy not the store
    Of the greased advocate, that grinds the poor;
    Fat fees[216] from the defended Umbrian draws,
    And only gains the wealthy client's cause;
    To whom the Marsians more provision send,
    Than he and all his family can spend.
    Gammons, that give a relish to the taste,
    And potted fowl, and fish come in so fast,
    That ere the first is out, the second stinks,
    And mouldy mother gathers on the brinks.
    But here some captain of the land, or fleet,
    Stout of his hands, but of a soldier's wit,
    Cries,--I have sense to serve my turn in store,
    And he's a rascal who pretends to more.
    Damn me, whate'er those book-learned blockheads say,
    Solon's the veriest fool in all the play.
    Top-heavy drones, and always looking down,
    (As over ballasted within the crown,)
    Muttering betwixt their lips some mystic thing,
    Which, well examined, is flat conjuring;
    Mere madmen's dreams; for what the schools have taught,            }
    Is only this, that nothing can be brought                          }
    From nothing, and what is can ne'er be turned to nought.           }
    Is it for this they study? to grow pale,
    And miss the pleasures of a glorious meal?
    For this, in rags accoutered, are they seen,
    And made the may-game of the public spleen?--
      Proceed, my friend, and rail; but hear me tell
    A story, which is just thy parallel:--
    A spark, like thee, of the man-killing trade,
    Fell sick, and thus to his physician said,--
    Methinks I am not right in every part;
    I feel a kind of trembling at my heart,
    My pulse unequal, and my breath is strong,
    Besides a filthy fur upon my tongue.
    The doctor heard him, exercised his skill,
    And after bade him for four days be still.
    Three days he took good counsel, and began
    To mend, and look like a recovering man;
    The fourth he could not hold from drink, but sends
    His boy to one of his old trusty friends,
    Adjuring him, by all the powers divine,                            }
    To pity his distress, who could not dine                           }
    Without a flaggon of his healing wine.                             }
    He drinks a swilling draught; and, lined within,
    Will supple in the bath his outward skin:
    Whom should he find but his physician there,
    Who wisely bade him once again beware.
    Sir, you look wan, you hardly draw your breath;
    Drinking is dangerous, and the bath is death.
    'Tis nothing, says the fool; but, says the friend,
    This nothing, sir, will bring you to your end.
    Do I not see your dropsy belly swell?
    Your yellow skin?--No more of that; I'm well.
    I have already buried two or three                                 }
    That stood betwixt a fair estate and me,                           }
    And, doctor, I may live to bury thee.                              }
    Thou tell'st me, I look ill; and thou look'st worse.
    I've done, says the physician; take your course.
    The laughing sot, like all unthinking men,
    Bathes, and gets drunk; then bathes, and drinks again:
    His throat half throttled with corrupted phlegm,
    And breathing through his jaws a belching steam,
    Amidst his cups with fainting shivering seized,
    His limbs disjointed, and all o'er diseased,
    His hand refuses to sustain the bowl,                              }
    And his teeth chatter, and his eye-balls roll,                     }
    Till with his meat he vomits out his soul;                         }
    Then trumpets, torches, and a tedious crew
    Of hireling mourners, for his funeral due.
    Our dear departed brother lies in state,                           }
    His heels stretched out, and pointing to the gate;[217]            }
    And slaves, now manumized, on their dead master wait.              }
    They hoist him on the bier, and deal the dole,
    And there's an end of a luxurious fool.
      But what's thy fulsome parable to me?
    My body is from all diseases free;
    My temperate pulse does regularly beat;                            }
    Feel, and be satisfied, my hands and feet:                         }
    These are not cold, nor those opprest with heat.                   }
    Or lay thy hand upon my naked heart,
    And thou shalt find me hale in every part.
      I grant this true; but still the deadly wound
    Is in thy soul, 'tis there thou art not sound.
    Say, when thou see'st a heap of tempting gold,
    Or a more tempting harlot dost behold;
    Then, when she casts on thee a side-long glance,
    Then try thy heart, and tell me if it dance.
      Some coarse cold sallad is before thee set;                      }
    Bread with the bran, perhaps, and broken meat;                     }
    Fall on, and try thy appetite to eat.                              }
    These are not dishes for thy dainty tooth:
    What, hast thou got an ulcer in thy mouth?
    Why stand'st thou picking? Is thy palate sore,
    That bete and radishes will make thee roar?
    Such is the unequal temper of thy mind,
    Thy passions in extremes, and unconfined;
    Thy hair so bristles with unmanly fears,
    As fields of corn, that rise in bearded ears;
    And when thy cheeks with flushing fury glow,                       }
    The rage of boiling cauldrons is more slow,                        }
    When fed with fuel and with flames below.                          }
    With foam upon thy lips and sparkling eyes,
    Thou say'st, and dost, in such outrageous wise,
    That mad Orestes,[218] if he saw the show,
    Would swear thou wert the madder of the two.

FOOTNOTES:

[206] Note I.

[207] Note II.

[208] Note III.

[209] Note IV.

[210] Note V.

[211] Note VI.

[212] Note VII.

[213] Note VIII.

[214] Note IX.

[215] Two learned physicians of the period. Dryden mentions Guibbons
more than once, as a friend.

[216] Note X.

[217] Note XI.

[218] Note XII.




NOTES

ON

TRANSLATIONS FROM PERSIUS.

SATIRE III.


Note I.

    _And parchment with the smoother side displayed._--P. 231.

The students used to write their notes on parchments; the inside,
on which they wrote, was white; the other side was hairy, and
commonly yellow. Quintilian reproves this custom, and advises rather
table-books, lined with wax, and a stile, like that we use in our
vellum table-books, as more easy.


Note II.

           _A fuming-pan thy Lares to appease._--P. 232.

Before eating, it was customary to cut off some part of the meat, which
was first put into a pan, or little dish, then into the fire, as an
offering to the household gods: this they called a Libation.


Note III.

      _Drawn from the root of some old Tuscan tree._--P. 232.

The Tuscans were accounted of most ancient nobility. Horace observes
this in most of his compliments to Mæcenas, who was derived from the
old kings of Tuscany; now the dominion of the Great Duke.


Note IV.

      _Who, clad in purple, canst thy censor greet._--P. 232.

The Roman knights, attired in the robe called _trabea_, were summoned
by the censor to appear before him, and to salute him in passing by, as
their names were called over. They led their horses in their hand. See
more of this in Pompey's Life, written by Plutarch.


Note V.

        _Sicilian tortures, and the brazen bull._--P. 233.

Some of the Sicilian kings were so great tyrants, that the name is
become proverbial. The brazen bull is a known story of Phalaris, one of
those tyrants, who, when Perillus, a famous artist, had presented him
with a bull of that metal hollowed within, which, when the condemned
person was inclosed in it, would render the sound of a bull's roaring,
caused the workman to make the first experiment,--_docuitque suum
mugire juvencum_.


Note VI.

    _The wretch, who, sitting at his plenteous board,
    Looked up, and viewed on high the pointed sword._--P. 233.

He alludes to the story of Damocles, a flatterer of one of those
Sicilian tyrants, namely Dionysius. Damocles had infinitely extolled
the happiness of kings: Dionysius, to convince him of the contrary,
invited him to a feast, and clothed him in purple; but caused a sword,
with the point downward, to be hung over his head by a silken twine;
which, when he perceived, he could eat nothing of the delicates that
were set before him.


Note VII.

        _Thou in the Stoic-porch, severely bred._--P. 233.

The Stoics taught their philosophy under a porticus, to secure their
scholars from the weather. Zeno was the chief of that sect.


Note VIII.

    _Where on the walls, by Polygnotus' hand,
    The conquered Medians in trunk-breeches stand._--P. 233.

Polygnotus, a famous painter, who drew the pictures of the Medes and
Persians, conquered by Miltiades, Themistocles, and other Athenian
captains, on the walls of the portico, in their natural habits.


Note IX.

    _And where the Samian Y directs thy steps to run
    To Virtue's narrow steep, and broad-way Vice to shun._ P. 234.

Pythagoras, of Samos, made the allusion of the Y, or Greek _upsilon_,
to Vice and Virtue. One side of the letter being broad, characters
Vice, to which the ascent is wide and easy; the other side represents
Virtue, to which the passage is strait and difficult; and perhaps
our Saviour might also allude to this, in those noted words of the
evangelist, "The way to heaven," &c.


Note X.

       _Fat fees from the defended Umbrian draws._--P. 235.

Casaubon here notes, that, among all the Romans, who were brought up to
learning, few, besides the orators or lawyers, grew rich.


Note XI.

   _His heels stretched out, and pointing to the gate._ P. 237.

The Romans were buried without the city; for which reason, the poet
says, that the dead man's heels were stretched out towards the gate.


Note XII.

                    ----_Mad Orestes._--P. 238.

Orestes was son to Agamemnon and Clytemnestra. Agamemnon, at his
return from the Trojan wars, was slain by Ægysthus, the adulterer
of Clytemnestra. Orestes, to revenge his father's death, slew both
Ægysthus and his mother; for which he was punished with madness by the
Eumenides, or Furies, who continually haunted him.




THE

FOURTH SATIRE

OF

PERSIUS.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _Our author, living in the time of Nero, was contemporary
      and friend to the noble poet Lucan. Both of them were
      sufficiently sensible, with all good men, how unskilfully
      he managed the commonwealth; and perhaps might guess at
      his future tyranny, by some passages, during the latter
      part of his first five years; though he broke not out into
      his great excesses, while he was restrained by the counsels
      and authority of Seneca. Lucan has not spared him in the
      poem of his Pharsalia; for his very compliment looked
      asquint, as well as Nero.[219] Persius has been bolder,
      but with caution likewise. For here, in the person of
      young Alcibiades, he arraigns his ambition of meddling
      with state-affairs without judgment, or experience. It is
      probable, that he makes Seneca, in this satire, sustain
      the part of Socrates, under a borrowed name; and, withal,
      discovers some secret vices of Nero, concerning his lust,
      his drunkenness, find his effeminacy, which had not yet
      arrived to public notice. He also reprehends the flattery
      of his courtiers, who endeavoured to make all his vices
      pass for virtues. Covetousness was undoubtedly none of his
      faults; but it is here described as a veil cast over the true
      meaning of the poet, which was to satirize his prodigality
      and voluptuousness; to which he makes a transition. I find
      no instance in history of that emperor's being a Pathic,
      though Persius seems to brand him with it. From the two
      dialogues of Plato, both called "Alcibiades," the poet
      took the arguments of the second and third satires; but he
      inverted the order of them, for the third satire is taken
      from the first of those dialogues._

    _The commentators before Casaubon were ignorant of our author's
      secret meaning; and thought he had only written against
      young noblemen in general, who were too forward in aspiring
      to public magistracy; but this excellent scholiast has
      unravelled the whole mystery, and made it apparent, that
      the sting of the satire was particularly aimed at Nero._


    Whoe'er thou art, whose forward years are bent
    On state affairs, to guide the government;
    Hear first what Socrates[220] of old has said
    To the loved youth, whom he at Athens bred.
      Tell me, thou pupil to great Pericles,
    Our second hope, my Alcibiades,[221]
    What are the grounds from whence thou dost prepare
    To undertake, so young, so vast a care?
    Perhaps thy wit; (a chance not often heard,
    That parts and prudence should prevent the beard;)
    'Tis seldom seen, that senators so young
    Know when to speak, and when to hold their tongue.
    Sure thou art born to some peculiar fate,
    When the mad people rise against the state,
    To look them into duty, and command
    An awful silence with thy lifted hand;
    Then to bespeak them thus:--Athenians, know
    Against right reason all your counsels go;
    This is not fair, nor profitable that,
    Nor t'other question proper for debate.--
    But thou, no doubt, can'st set the business right,
    And give each argument its proper weight;
    Know'st, with an equal hand, to hold the scale;                    }
    Seest where the reasons pinch, and where they fail,                }
    And where exceptions o'er the general rule prevail;                }
    And, taught by inspiration, in a trice,
    Can'st punish crimes,[222] and brand offending vice.
      Leave, leave to fathom such high points as these,
    Nor be ambitious, e'er thy time, to please,
    Unseasonably wise; till age and cares
    Have formed thy soul to manage great affairs.
    Thy face, thy shape, thy outside, are but vain;                    }
    Thou hast not strength such labours to sustain;                    }
    Drink hellebore,[223] my boy; drink deep, and purge thy brain.     }
      What aim'st thou at, and whither tends thy care,                 }
    In what thy utmost good? Delicious fare;                           }
    And then, to sun thyself in open air.                              }
      Hold, hold; are all thy empty wishes such?
    A good old woman would have said as much.
    But thou art nobly born: 'tis true; go boast
    Thy pedigree, the thing thou valuest most:
    Besides, thou art a beau; what's that, my child?
    A fop, well drest, extravagant, and wild:
    She that cries herbs, has less impertinence,
    And in her calling more of common sense.
      None, none descends into himself, to find
    The secret imperfections of his mind;
    But every one is eagle-eyed, to see
    Another's faults, and his deformity.
    Say, dost thou know Vectidius?[224]--Who? the wretch
    Whose lands beyond the Sabines largely stretch;
    Cover the country, that a sailing kite
    Can scarce o'er fly them in a day and night;
    Him dost thou mean, who, spite of all his store,
    Is ever craving, and will still be poor?
    Who cheats for half-pence, and who doffs his coat,
    To save a farthing in a ferry-boat?
    Ever a glutton at another's cost,
    But in whose kitchen dwells perpetual frost?
    Who eats and drinks with his domestic slaves,
    A verier hind than any of his knaves?
    Born with the curse and anger of the gods,
    And that indulgent genius he defrauds?
    At harvest-home, and on the shearing-day,
    When he should thanks to Pan and Pales pay,
    And better Ceres,[225] trembling to approach
    The little barrel, which he fears to broach;
    He 'says the wimble, often draws it back,
    And deals to thirsty servants but a smack.
    To a short meal he makes a tedious grace,
    Before the barley-pudding comes in place:
    Then bids fall on; himself, for saving charges,
    A peeled sliced onion eats, and tipples verjuice.--
      Thus fares the drudge: but thou, whose life's a dream
    Of lazy pleasures, takest a worse extreme.
    'Tis all thy business, business how to shun;
    To bask thy naked body in the sun;
    Suppling thy stiffened joints with fragrant oil:
    Then, in thy spacious garden walk a while,
    To suck the moisture up, and soak it in;
    And this, thou think'st, but vainly think'st, unseen.
    But know, thou art observed; and there are those,
    Who, if they durst, would all thy secret sins expose;
    The depilation of thy modest part;                                 }
    Thy catamite, the darling of thy heart,                            }
    His engine-hand, and every lewder art,                             }
    When, prone to bear, and patient to receive,
    Thou tak'st the pleasure which thou canst not give.
    With odorous oil thy head and hair are sleek,
    And then thou kemb'st the tuzzes on thy cheek;
    Of these thy barbers take a costly care,
    While thy salt tail is overgrown with hair.
    Not all thy pincers, nor unmanly arts,
    Can smooth the roughness of thy shameful parts.
    Not five, the strongest that the Circus breeds,[226]
    From the rank soil can root those wicked weeds,
    Though suppled first with soap, to ease thy pain;
    The stubborn fern springs up, and sprouts again.
      Thus others we with defamations wound,
    While they stab us, and so the jest goes round.
    Vain are thy hopes, to 'scape censorious eyes;
    Truth will appear through all the thin disguise:
    Thou hast an ulcer which no leach can heal,
    Though thy broad shoulder-belt the wound conceal.
    Say thou art sound and hale in every part,
    We know, we know thee rotten at thy heart.
    We know thee sullen, impotent, and proud:
    Nor canst thou cheat thy nerve, who cheat'st the crowd.--
      But when they praise me in the neighbourhood,
    When the pleased people take me for a god,
    Shall I refuse their incense? Not receive
    The loud applauses which the vulgar give?--
      If thou dost wealth with longing eyes behold,
    And greedily art gaping after gold;
    If some alluring girl, in gliding by,                              }
    Shall tip the wink, with a lascivious eye,                         }
    And thou, with a consenting glance, reply;                         }
    If thou thy own solicitor become,
    And bidst arise the lumpish pendulum;
    If thy lewd lust provokes an empty storm,
    And prompts to more than nature can perform;
    If, with thy guards, thou scour'st the streets by night,
    And dost in murders, rapes, and spoils delight;[227]
    Please not thyself, the flattering crowd to hear,
    'Tis fulsome stuff to feed thy itching ear.
    Reject the nauseous praises of the times;
    Give thy base poets back their cobled rhimes:
    Survey thy soul, not what thou dost appear,
    But what thou art, and find the beggar there.[228]

FOOTNOTES:

[219] The compliment, at the opening of the Pharsalia, has been thought
sarcastic. It certainly sounds so in modern ears: if Nero could only
attain empire by civil war, as the gods by that of the giants, then
says the poet,

    ----_Scelera ipsa nefasque
    Hac mercede placent_.----

[220] Note I.

[221] Note II.

[222] Note III.

[223] Note IV.

[224] Note V.

[225] Note VI.

[226] Note VII.

[227] Note VIII.

[228] Note IX.




NOTES

ON

TRANSLATIONS FROM PERSIUS.

SATIRE IV.


Note I.

                       _Socrates._--P. 243.

Socrates, whom the oracle of Delphos praised as the wisest man of
his age, lived in the time of the Peloponnesian war. He, finding the
uncertainty of natural philosophy, applied himself wholly to the moral.
He was master to Xenophon and Plato, and to many of the Athenian young
noblemen; amongst the rest to Alcibiades, the most lovely youth then
living; afterwards a famous captain, whose life is written by Plutarch.


Note II.

    _Tell me, thou pupil to great Pericles,
    Our second hope, my Alcibiades._--P. 243.

Pericles was tutor, or rather overseer, of the will of Clinias, father
to Alcibiades. While Pericles lived, who was a wise man, and an
excellent orator, as well as a great general, the Athenians had the
better of the war.


Note III.

                 _Can'st punish crimes._--P. 244.

That is, by death. When the judges would condemn a malefactor, they
cast their votes into an urn; as, according to the modern custom,
a balloting-box. If the suffrages were marked with #Theta#, they
signified the sentence of death to the offender; as being the first
letter of #Thanatos#, which, in English, is death.


Note IV.

                    _Drink hellebore._--P. 244.

The poet would say, that such an ignorant young man, as he here
describes, is fitter to be governed himself than to govern others. He
therefore advises him to drink hellebore, which purges the brain.


Note V.

             _Say, dost thou know Vectidius?_--P. 245.

The name of Vectidius is here used appellatively, to signify any rich
covetous man, though perhaps there might be a man of that name then
living. I have translated this passage paraphrastically, and loosely;
and leave it for those to look on, who are not unlike the picture.


Note VI.

    _When he should thanks to Pan and Pales pay,
    And better Ceres._--P. 245.

Pan, the god of shepherds, and Pales, the goddess presiding over rural
affairs; whom Virgil invocates in the beginning of his second Georgic.
I give the epithet of _better_ to Ceres, because she first taught the
use of corn for bread, as the poets tell us; men, in the first rude
ages, feeding only on acorns, or mast, instead of bread.


Note VII.

    _Not five, the strongest that the Circus breeds._--P. 246.

The learned Holyday (who has made us amends for his bad poetry in this
and the rest of these satires, with his excellent illustrations), here
tells us, from good authority, that the number five does not allude
to the five fingers of one man, but to five strong men, such as were
skilful in the five robust exercises then in practice at Rome, and were
performed in the circus, or public place ordained for them. These five
he reckons up in this manner: 1. The Cæstus, or Whirlbatts, described
by Virgil in his fifth Æneid; and this was the most dangerous of all
the rest. The 2d was the foot-race. The 3d, the discus; like the
throwing a weighty ball; a sport now used in Cornwall, and other parts
of England; we may see it daily practised in Red-Lyon Fields. The 4th,
was the Saltus, or Leaping; and the 5th, wrestling naked, and besmeared
with oil. They who practised in these five manly exercises were called
#Pentathloi#.


Note VIII.

    _If, with thy guards, thou scour'st the streets by night,
    And dost in murders, rapes, and spoils, delight._--P. 247.

Persius durst not have been so bold with Nero as I dare now; and
therefore there is only an intimation of that in him which I publicly
speak: I mean, of Nero's walking the streets by night in disguise,
and committing all sorts of outrages, for which he was sometimes well
beaten.


Note IX.

                _Not what thou dost appear,
    But what thou art, and find the beggar there._--P. 247.

Look into thyself, and examine thy own conscience; there thou shalt
find, that, how wealthy soever thou appearest to the world, yet thou
art but a beggar; because thou art destitute of all virtues, which are
the riches of the soul. This also was a paradox of the Stoic school.




THE

FIFTH SATIRE

OF

PERSIUS.

INSCRIBED TO

THE REV. DR BUSBY.

THE SPEAKERS

PERSIUS AND CORNUTUS.


                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _The judicious Casaubon, in his proem to this Satire, tells
      us, that Aristophanes, the grammarian, being asked, what
      poem of Archilochus' Iambics he preferred before the rest;
      answered, the longest. His answer may justly be applied
      to this Fifth Satire; which, being of a greater length
      than any of the rest, is also by far the most instructive.
      For this reason I have selected it from all the others,
      and inscribed it to my learned master, Dr Busby; to whom
      I am not only obliged myself for the best part of my own
      education, and that of my two sons; but have also received
      from him the first and truest taste of Persius. May he be
      pleased to find, in this translation, the gratitude, or at
      least some small acknowledgment, of his unworthy scholar,
      at the distance of forty-two years from the time when I
      departed from under his tuition. This Satire consists of
      two distinct parts: The first contains the praises of
      the stoic philosopher, Cornutus, master and tutor to our
      Persius; it also declares the love and piety of Persius to
      his well-deserving master; and the mutual friendship which
      continued betwixt them, after Persius was now grown a man;
      as also his exhortation to young noblemen, that they would
      enter themselves into his institution. From hence he makes
      an artful transition into the second part of his subject;
      wherein he first complains of the sloth of scholars, and
      afterwards persuades them to the pursuit of their true
      liberty. Here our author excellently treats that paradox of
      the Stoics, which affirms, that the wise or virtuous man is
      only free, and that all vicious men are naturally slaves;
      and, in the illustration of this dogma, he takes up the
      remaining part of this inimitable Satire._

                                PERSIUS.

    Of ancient use to poets it belongs,
    To wish themselves an hundred mouths and tongues:
    Whether to the well-lunged tragedian's rage
    They recommend their labours of the stage,
    Or sing the Parthian, when transfixed he lies,
    Wrenching the Roman javelin from his thighs.

                               CORNUTUS.

      And why would'st thou these mighty morsels chuse,
    Of words unchewed, and fit to choke the muse?
    Let fustian poets with their stuff begone,
    And suck the mists that hang o'er Helicon;
    When Progne,[229] or Thyestes'[230] feast they write;
    And, for the mouthing actor, verse indite.
    Thou neither like a bellows swell'st thy face,
    As if thou wert to blow the burning mass
    Of melting ore; nor canst thou strain thy throat,
    Or murmur in an undistinguished note,
    Like rolling thunder, till it breaks the cloud,
    And rattling nonsense is discharged aloud.
    Soft elocution does thy style renown,
    And the sweet accents of the peaceful gown:
    Gentle or sharp, according to thy choice,
    To laugh at follies, or to lash at vice.
    Hence draw thy theme, and to the stage permit
    Raw-head and bloody-bones, and hands and feet,
    Ragouts for Tereus or Thyestes drest;
    'Tis task enough for thee t' expose a Roman feast.

                                PERSIUS.

      'Tis not, indeed, my talent to engage
    In lofty trifles, or to swell my page
    With wind and noise; but freely to impart,
    As to a friend, the secrets of my heart,
    And, in familiar speech, to let thee know
    How much I love thee, and how much I owe.
    Knock on my heart; for thou hast skill to find                     }
    If it sound solid, or be filled with wind;                         }
    And, through the veil of words, thou view'st the naked mind.       }
      For this a hundred voices I desire,
    To tell thee what an hundred tongues would tire,
    Yet never could be worthily exprest,--
    How deeply thou art seated in my breast.
    When first my childish robe[231] resigned the charge,
    And left me, unconfined, to live at large;
    When now my golden bulla (hung on high                             }
    To household gods) declared me past a boy,                         }
    And my white shield proclaimed my liberty;[232]                    }
    When, with my wild companions, I could roll
    From street to street, and sin without controul;
    Just at that age, when manhood set me free,
    I then deposed myself, and left the reins to thee;
    On thy wise bosom I reposed my head,
    And by my better Socrates was bred.[233]
    Then thy straight rule set virtue in my sight,
    The crooked line reforming by the right.
    My reason took the bent of thy command,
    Was formed and polished by thy skilful hand;
    Long summer-days thy precepts I rehearse,
    And winter-nights were short in our converse;
    One was our labour, one was our repose,
    One frugal supper did our studies close.
      Sure on our birth some friendly planet shone;
    And, as our souls, our horoscope[234] was one:
    Whether the mounting Twins[235] did heaven adorn,
    Or with the rising Balance[236] we were born;
    Both have the same impressions from above.
    And both have Saturn's rage, repelled by Jove.[237]
    What star I know not, but some star, I find,
    Has given thee an ascendant o'er my mind.

                               CORNUTUS.

      Nature is ever various in her frame;
    Each has a different will, and few the same.
    The greedy merchants, led by lucre, run
    To the parched Indies, and the rising sun;
    From thence hot pepper and rich drugs they bear,
    Bartering for spices their Italian ware;
    The lazy glutton, safe at home, will keep,
    Indulge his sloth, and batten with his sleep:
    One bribes for high preferments in the state;
    A second shakes the box, and sits up late;
    Another shakes the bed, dissolving there,
    Till knots upon his gouty joints appear,
    And chalk is in his crippled fingers found;
    Rots, like a doddered oak, and piecemeal falls to ground;
    Then his lewd follies he would late repent,
    And his past years, that in a mist were spent.

                                PERSIUS.

    But thou art pale in nightly studies grown,
    To make the Stoic institutes thy own:[238]
    Thou long, with studious care, hast tilled our youth,
    And sown our well-purged ears with wholesome truth.
    From thee both old and young with profit learn                     }
    The bounds of good and evil to discern.                            }

                               CORNUTUS.

      Unhappy he who does this work adjourn,                           }
    And to to-morrow would the search delay;
    His lazy morrow will be like to-day.

                                PERSIUS.

    But is one day of ease too much to borrow?

                               CORNUTUS.

    Yes, sure; for yesterday was once to-morrow.
    That yesterday is gone, and nothing gained,
    And all thy fruitless days will thus be drained;
    For thou hast more to-morrows yet to ask,
    And wilt be ever to begin thy task;
    Who, like the hindmost chariot-wheels, art curst,
    Still to be near, but ne'er to reach the first.
    O freedom, first delight of human kind!
    Not that which bondmen from their masters find,
    The privilege of doles;[239] nor yet to inscribe
    Their names in this or t'other Roman tribe;[240]
    That false enfranchisement with ease is found,
    Slaves are made citizens by turning round.[241]
    How, replies one, can any be more free?
    Here's Dama, once a groom of low degree,
    Not worth a farthing, and a sot beside,
    So true a rogue, for lying's sake he lied;
    But, with a turn, a freeman he became,
    Now Marcus Dama is his worship's name.[242]
    Good gods! who would refuse to lend a sum,
    If wealthy Marcus surety will become!
    Marcus is made a judge, and for a proof
    Of certain truth, "He said it," is enough.
    A will is to be proved;--put in your claim;--
    'Tis clear, if Marcus has subscribed his name.[243]
    This is true liberty, as I believe;                                }
    What farther can we from our caps receive,                         }
    Than as we please without controul to live?[244]                   }
    Not more to noble Brutus[245] could belong.
    Hold, says the Stoic, your assumption's wrong:
    I grant true freedom you have well defined:                        }
    But, living as you list, and to your mind,                         }
    Are loosely tacked, and must be left behind.--                     }
    What! since the prætor did my fetters loose,
    And left me freely at my own dispose,
    May I not live without controul or awe,
    Excepting still the letter of the law?--[246]
      Hear me with patience, while thy mind I free
    From those fond notions of false liberty:
    'Tis not the prætor's province to bestow                           }
    True freedom; nor to teach mankind to know                         }
    What to ourselves, or to our friends, we owe.                      }
    He could not set thee free from cares and strife,
    Nor give the reins to a lewd vicious life:
    As well he for an ass a harp might string,
    Which is against the reason of the thing;
    For reason still is whispering in your ear,
    Where you are sure to fail, the attempt forbear.
    No need of public sanctions this to bind,                        }
    Which nature has implanted in the mind,--                        }
    Not to pursue the work, to which we're not designed.             }
      Unskilled in hellebore, if thou should'st try                    }
    To mix it, and mistake the quantity,                               }
    The rules of physic would against thee cry.                        }
    The high-shoe'd ploughman, should he quit the land,              }
    To take the pilot's rudder in his hand,                          }
    Artless of stars, and of the moving sand,                        }
    No need of public sanctions this to bind,                          }
    Which nature has implanted in the mind,--                          }
    Not to pursue the work, to which we're not designed.               }
      Unskilled in hellebore, if thou should'st try                  }
    To mix it, and mistake the quantity,                             }
    The rules of physic would against thee cry.                      }
    The high-shoe'd ploughman, should he quit the land,                }
    To take the pilot's rudder in his hand,                            }
    Artless of stars, and of the moving sand,                          }
    The gods would leave him to the waves and wind,
    And think all shame was lost in human kind.
      Tell me, my friend, from whence had'st thou the skill,
    So nicely to distinguish good from ill?
    Or by the sound to judge of gold and brass,
    What piece is tinkers' metal, what will pass?
    And what thou art to follow, what to fly,
    This to condemn, and that to ratify?
    When to be bountiful, and when to spare,
    But never craving, or oppressed with care?
    The baits of gifts, and money to despise,
    And look on wealth with undesiring eyes?
    When thou canst truly call these virtues thine,
    Be wise and free, by heaven's consent and mine.
      But thou, who lately of the common strain
    Wert one of us, if still thou dost retain
    The same ill habits, the same follies too,
    Glossed over only with a saint-like show,
    Then I resume the freedom which I gave;
    Still thou art bound to vice, and still a slave.
    Thou canst not wag thy finger, or begin
    "The least light motion, but it tends to sin."
      How's this? Not wag my finger, he replies?                       }
    No, friend; nor fuming gums, nor sacrifice,                        }
    Can ever make a madman free, or wise.                              }
    "Virtue and vice are never in one soul;
    A man is wholly wise, or wholly is a fool."[247]
    A heavy bumpkin, taught with daily care,
    Can never dance three steps with a becoming air.

                                PERSIUS.

    In spite of this, my freedom still remains.

                               CORNUTUS.

      Free! what, and fettered with so many chains?
    Canst thou no other master understand
    Than him that freed thee by the prætor's wand?[248]
    Should he, who was thy lord, command thee now,
    With a harsh voice, and supercilious brow,
    To servile duties, thou would'st fear no more;
    The gallows and the whip are out of door.
    But if thy passions lord it in thy breast,
    Art thou not still a slave, and still opprest?
    Whether alone, or in thy harlot's lap,
    When thou would'st take a lazy morning's nap,
    Up, up, says Avarice;--thou snor'st again,
    Stretchest thy limbs, and yawn'st, but all in vain;
    The tyrant Lucre no denial takes;
    At his command the unwilling sluggard wakes.
    What must I do? he cries:--What? says his lord;
    Why rise, make ready, and go straight aboard;
    With fish, from Euxine seas, thy vessel freight;
    Flax, castor, Coan wines, the precious weight
    Of pepper, and Sabæan incense, take,                               }
    With thy own hands, from the tired camel's back,                   }
    And with post haste thy running markets make.                      }
    Be sure to turn the penny; lie and swear,
    'Tis wholesome sin:--but Jove, thou say'st, will hear:--
    Swear, fool, or starve; for the dilemma's even:
    A tradesman thou, and hope to go to heaven!
      Resolved for sea, the slaves thy baggage pack,
    Each saddled with his burden on his back;
    Nothing retards thy voyage now, unless
    Thy other lord forbids, Voluptuousness:
    And he may ask this civil question,--Friend,
    What dost thou make a shipboard? to what end?
    Art thou of Bethlem's noble college free,
    Stark, staring mad, that thou would'st tempt the sea?
    Cubbed in a cabin, on a mattress laid,
    On a brown george, with lousy swobbers fed,
    Dead wine, that stinks of the borrachio, sup
    From a foul jack,[249] or greasy maple-cup?
    Say, would'st thou bear all this, to raise thy store
    From six i'the hundred, to six hundred more?
    Indulge, and to thy genius freely give;
    For, not to live at ease, is not to live;
    Death stalks behind thee, and each flying hour
    Does some loose remnant of thy life devour.
    Live, while thou liv'st; for death will make us all
    A name, a nothing but an old wife's tale.
      Speak; wilt thou Avarice, or Pleasure, chuse
    To be thy lord? Take one, and one refuse.
    But both by turns the rule of thee will have,
    And thou betwixt them both wilt be a slave.
      Nor think when once thou hast resisted one,
    That all thy marks of servitude are gone:
    The struggling grey-hound gnaws his leash in vain;
    If, when 'tis broken, still he drags the chain.
      Says Phædria to his man,[250] Believe me, friend,
    To this uneasy love I'll put an end:
    Shall I run out of all? My friends' disgrace,
    And be the first lewd unthrift of my race?
    Shall I the neighbours nightly rest invade
    At her deaf doors, with some vile serenade?--
    Well hast thou freed thyself, his man replies,
    Go, thank the gods, and offer sacrifice.--
    Ah, says the youth, if we unkindly part,
    Will not the poor fond creature break her heart?--
    Weak soul! and blindly to destruction led!
    She break her heart! she'll sooner break your head.
    She knows her man, and when you rant and swear,
    Can draw you to her with a single hair.--
    But shall I not return? Now, when she sues!
    Shall I my own and her desires refuse?--
    Sir, take your course; but my advice is plain:
    Once freed, 'tis madness to resume your chain.
      Ay; there's the man, who, loosed from lust and pelf,
    Less to the prætor owes than to himself.
    But write him down a slave, who, humbly proud,
    With presents begs preferments from the crowd;[251]
    That early suppliant, who salutes the tribes,
    And sets the mob to scramble for his bribes,
    That some old dotard, sitting in the sun,
    On holidays may tell, that such a feat was done:
    In future times this will be counted rare.
      Thy superstition too may claim a share:
    When flowers are strewed, and lamps in order placed,
    And windows with illuminations graced,
    On Herod's day;[252] when sparkling bowls go round,
    And tunny's tails in savoury sauce are drowned,
    Thou mutter'st prayers obscene; nor dost refuse
    The fasts and sabbaths of the curtailed Jews.
    Then a cracked egg-shell thy sick fancy frights,[253]
    Besides the childish fear of walking sprites.
    Of o'ergrown gelding priests thou art afraid;
    The timbrel, and the squintifego maid
    Of Isis, awe thee; lest the gods for sin,
    Should with a swelling dropsy stuff thy skin:
    Unless three garlic heads the curse avert,
    Eaten each morn devoutly next thy heart.
      Preach this among the brawny guards, say'st thou,
    And see if they thy doctrine will allow:
    The dull, fat captain, with a hound's deep throat,
    Would bellow out a laugh in a bass note,
    And prize a hundred Zeno's just as much
    As a clipt sixpence, or a schilling Dutch.




THE

SIXTH SATIRE

OF

PERSIUS.

TO

CÆSIUS BASSUS,

A LYRIC POET.

                             THE ARGUMENT.

    _This Sixth Satire treats an admirable common-place of moral
      philosophy, of the true use of riches. They are certainly
      intended by the Power who bestows them, as instruments
      and helps of living commodiously ourselves; and of
      administering to the wants of others, who are oppressed
      by fortune. There are two extremes in the opinions of men
      concerning them. One error, though on the right hand,
      yet a great one, is, that they are no helps to a virtuous
      life; the other places all our happiness in the acquisition
      and possession of them; and this is undoubtedly the worse
      extreme. The mean betwixt these, is the opinion of the
      Stoics, which is, that riches may be useful to the leading
      a virtuous life; in case we rightly understand how to give
      according to right reason, and how to receive what is
      given us by others. The virtue of giving well, is called
      liberality; and it is of this virtue that Persius writes
      in this satire, wherein he not only shows the lawful use
      of riches, but also sharply inveighs against the vices
      which are opposed to it; and especially of those, which
      consist in the defects of giving, or spending, or in the
      abuse of riches. He writes to Cæsius Bassus, his friend,
      and a poet also. Enquires first of his health and studies;
      and afterwards informs him of his own, and where he is
      now resident. He gives an account of himself, that he is
      endeavouring, by little and little, to wear off his vices;
      and, particularly, that he is combating ambition, and the
      desire of wealth. He dwells upon the latter vice; and being
      sensible, that few men either desire, or use, riches as
      they ought, he endeavours to convince them of their folly,
      which is the main design of the whole satire._


    Has winter caused thee, friend, to change thy seat,[255]
    And seek in Sabine air a warm retreat?
    Say, dost thou yet the Roman harp command?
    Do the strings answer to thy noble hand?
    Great master of the muse, inspired to sing
    The beauties of the first created spring;
    The pedigree of nature to rehearse,
    And sound the Maker's work, in equal verse;
    Now sporting on thy lyre the loves of youth,[256]
    Now virtuous age, and venerable truth;
    Expressing justly Sappho's wanton art
    Of odes, and Pindar's more majestic part.
      For me, my warmer constitution wants
    More cold, than our Ligurian winter grants;
    And therefore to my native shores retired,
    I view the coast old Ennius once admired;
    Where clifts on either side their points display,                  }
    And, after opening in an ampler way,                               }
    Afford the pleasing prospect of the bay.                           }
    'Tis worth your while, O Romans, to regard
    The port of Luna, says our learned bard;
    Who in a drunken dream beheld his soul
    The fifth within the transmigrating roll;[257]
    Which first a peacock, then Euphorbus was,                         }
    Then Homer next, and next Pythagoras;                              }
    And, last of all the line, did into Ennius pass.                   }
      Secure and free from business of the state,
    And more secure of what the vulgar prate,
    Here I enjoy my private thoughts, nor care
    What rots for sheep the southern winds prepare;
    Survey the neighbouring fields, and not repine,
    When I behold a larger crop than mine:
    To see a beggar's brat in riches flow,
    Adds not a wrinkle to my even brow;
    Nor, envious at the sight, will I forbear
    My plenteous bowl, nor bate my bounteous cheer;
    Nor yet unseal the dregs of wine that stink
    Of cask, nor in a nasty flaggon drink;
    Let others stuff their guts with homely fare,                      }
    For men of different inclinations are,                             }
    Though born perhaps beneath one common star.                       }
    In minds and manners twins opposed we see
    In the same sign, almost the same degree:
    One, frugal, on his birth-day fears to dine,                       }
    Does at a penny's cost in herbs repine,                            }
    And hardly dares to dip his fingers in the brine;                  }
    Prepared as priest of his own rites to stand,
    He sprinkles pepper with a sparing hand.
    His jolly brother, opposite in sense,                              }
    Laughs at his thrift; and, lavish of expence,                      }
    Quaffs, crams, and guttles, in his own defence.                    }
      For me, I'll use my own, and take my share,
    Yet will not turbots for my slaves prepare;
    Nor be so nice in taste myself to know
    If what I swallow be a thrush, or no.
    Live on thy annual income, spend thy store,                        }
    And freely grind from thy full threshing floor;                    }
    Next harvest promises as much, or more.                            }
      Thus I would live; but friendship's holy band,                   }
    And offices of kindness, hold my hand:                             }
    My friend is shipwrecked on the Brutian strand,[258]               }
    His riches in the Ionian main are lost,
    And he himself stands shivering on the coast;
    Where, destitute of help, forlorn and bare,
    He wearies the deaf gods with fruitless prayer.
    Their images, the relics of the wreck,
    Torn from the naked poop, are tided back
    By the wild waves, and, rudely thrown ashore,
    Lie impotent, nor can themselves restore;
    The vessel sticks, and shews her opened side,
    And on her shattered mast the mews in triumph ride.
    From thy new hope, and from thy growing store,
    Now lend assistance, and relieve the poor;[259]
    Come, do a noble act of charity,
    A pittance of thy land will set him free.
    Let him not bear the badges of a wreck,
    Nor beg with a blue table on his back;[260]
    Nor tell me, that thy frowning heir will say,
    'Tis mine that wealth thou squander'st thus away:
    What is't to thee, if he neglect thy urn?
    Or without spices lets thy body burn?[261]
    If odours to thy ashes he refuse,
    Or buys corrupted cassia from the Jews?
    All these, the wiser Bestius will reply,
    Are empty pomp, and dead-men's luxury:
    We never knew this vain expence before
    The effeminated Grecians brought it o'er:
    Now toys and trifles from their Athens come,
    And dates and pepper have unsinewed Rome.
    Our sweating hinds their sallads now defile,
    Infecting homely herbs with fragrant oil.
    But to thy fortune be not thou a slave;
    For what hast thou to fear beyond the grave?
    And thou, who gap'st for my estate, draw near;
    For I would whisper somewhat in thy ear.
    Hear'st thou the news, my friend? the express is come,
    With laurelled letters, from the camp to Rome:
    Cæsar salutes the queen and senate thus:--
    My arms are on the Rhine victorious.[262]
    From mourning altars sweep the dust away,
    Cease fasting, and proclaim a fat thanksgiving-day.
    The goodly empress,[263] jollily inclined,
    Is to the welcome bearer wonderous kind;
    And, setting her good housewifery aside,
    Prepares for all the pageantry of pride.
    The captive Germans, of gigantic size,[264]
    Are ranked in order, and are clad in frize:
    The spoils of kings, and conquered camps we boast,
    Their arms in trophies hang on the triumphal post.
      Now for so many glorious actions done
    In foreign parts, and mighty battles won;
    For peace at home, and for the public wealth,
    I mean to crown a bowl to Cæsar's health.
    Besides, in gratitude for such high matters,
    Know I have vowed two hundred gladiators.[265]
    Say, would'st thou hinder me from this expence?
    I disinherit thee, if thou dar'st take offence.
    Yet more, a public largess I design
    Of oil and pies, to make the people dine;
    Controul me not, for fear I change my will.
      And yet methinks I hear thee grumbling still,--
    You give as if you were the Persian king;
    Your land does not so large revenues bring.
    Well, on my terms thou wilt not be my heir?
    If thou car'st little, less shall be my care.
    Were none of all my father's sisters left;
    Nay, were I of my mother's kin bereft;
    None by an uncle's or a grandame's side,
    Yet I could some adopted heir provide.
    I need but take my journey half a day                              }
    From haughty Rome, and at Aricia stay,                             }
    Where fortune throws poor Manius in my way.                        }
    Him will I choose:--What him, of humble birth,
    Obscure, a foundling, and a son of earth--
    Obscure! Why, pr'ythee, what am I? I know
    My father, grandsire, and great-grandsire too:
    If farther I derive my pedigree,
    I can but guess beyond the fourth degree.
    The rest of my forgotten ancestors
    Were sons of earth, like him, or sons of whores.
      Yet why should'st thou, old covetous wretch, aspire
    To be my heir, who might'st have been my sire?
    In nature's race, should'st thou demand of me
    My torch, when I in course run after thee?[266]
    Think I approach thee, like the god of gain,
    With wings on head and heels, as poets feign:
    Thy moderate fortune from my gift receive;
    Now fairly take it, or as fairly leave.
    But take it as it is, and ask no more--
    What, when thou hast embezzled all thy store?
    Where's all thy father left?--'Tis true, I grant,
    Some I have mortgaged to supply my want:
    The legacies of Tadius too are flown,
    All spent, and on the self-same errand gone.--
    How little then to my poor share will fall!--
    Little indeed; but yet that little's all.
      Nor tell me, in a dying father's tone,--
    Be careful still of the main chance, my son;
    Put out thy principal in trusty hands,
    Live on the use, and never dip thy lands:
    But yet what's left for me?--What's left, my friend!
    Ask that again, and all the rest I spend.
    Is not my fortune at my own command?
    Pour oil, and pour it with a plenteous hand
    Upon my sallads, boy: shall I be fed
    With sodden nettles, and a singed sow's head?
    'Tis holiday, provide me better cheer;
    'Tis holiday, and shall be round the year.
    Shall I my household gods and genius cheat,
    To make him rich, who grudges me my meat,
    That he may loll at ease, and, pampered high,
    When I am laid, may feed on giblet-pie,
    And, when his throbbing lust extends the vein,
    Have wherewithal his whores to entertain?
    Shall I in homespun cloth be clad, that he
    His paunch in triumph may before him see?
      Go, miser, go; for lucre sell thy soul;
    Truck wares for wares, and trudge from pole to pole,
    That men may say, when thou art dead and gone,
    See what a vast estate he left his son!
    How large a family of brawny knaves,
    Well fed, and fat as Cappadocian slaves![267]
    Increase thy wealth, and double all thy store;                     }
    'Tis done; now double that, and swell the score;                   }
    To every thousand add ten thousand more.                           }
    Then say, Chrysippus,[268] thou who would'st confine
    Thy heap, where I shall put an end to mine.




PASTORAL I.

OR,

_TITYRUS AND MELIBOEUS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _The occasion of the First Pastoral was this: When Augustus
      had settled himself in the Roman empire, that he might
      reward his veteran troops for their past service, he
      distributed among them all the lands that lay about Cremona
      and Mantua; turning out the right owners for having sided
      with his enemies. Virgil was a sufferer among the rest, who
      afterwards recovered his estate by Mæcenas's intercession;
      and, as an instance of his gratitude, composed the
      following Pastoral, where he sets out his own good fortune
      in the person of Tityrus, and the calamities of his Mantuan
      neighbours in the character of Meliboeus._

                               MELIBOEUS.

    Beneath the shade which beechen boughs diffuse,
    You, Tityrus, entertain your sylvan muse.
    Round the wide world in banishment we roam,
    Forced from our pleasing fields and native home;
    While, stretched at ease, you sing your happy loves,
    And Amaryllis fills the shady groves.

                                TITYRUS.

    These blessings, friend, a deity bestowed;
    For never can I deem him less than God.
    The tender firstlings of my woolly breed
    Shall on his holy altar often bleed.
    He gave my kine to graze the flowery plain,
    And to my pipe renewed the rural strain.

                               MELIBOEUS.

    I envy not your fortune, but admire,
    That, while the raging sword and wasteful fire
    Destroy the wretched neighbourhood around,
    No hostile arms approach your happy ground.
    Far different is my fate; my feeble goats
    With pains I drive from their forsaken cotes:
    And this, you see, I scarcely drag along,
    Who, yeaning, on the rocks has left her young,
    The hope and promise of my failing fold.
    My loss, by dire portents, the gods foretold;
    For, had I not been blind, I might have seen:--
    Yon riven oak, the fairest of the green,
    And the hoarse raven, on the blasted bough,
    By croaking from the left, presaged the coming blow.
    But tell me, Tityrus, what heavenly power
    Preserved your fortunes in that fatal hour?

                                TITYRUS.

    Fool that I was, I thought imperial Rome                           }
    Like Mantua, where on market-days we come,                         }
    And thither drive our tender lambs from home.                      }
    So kids and whelps their sires and dams express,
    And so the great I measured by the less.
    But country towns, compared with her, appear
    Like shrubs, when lofty cypresses are near.

                               MELIBOEUS.

    What great occasion called you hence to Rome?

                                TITYRUS.

    Freedom, which came at length, though slow to come.
    Nor did my search of liberty begin,
    Till my black hairs were changed upon my chin;
    Nor Amaryllis would vouchsafe a look,
    Till Galatea's meaner bonds I broke.
    Till then a helpless, hopeless, homely swain,
    I sought not freedom, nor aspired to gain:
    Though many a victim from my folds was bought,
    And many a cheese to country markets brought,
    Yet all the little that I got, I spent,
    And still returned as empty as I went.

                               MELIBOEUS.

    We stood amazed to see your mistress mourn,
    Unknowing that she pined for your return;
    We wondered why she kept her fruit so long,
    For whom so late the ungathered apples hung.
    But now the wonder ceases, since I see
    She kept them only, Tityrus, for thee;
    For thee the bubbling springs appeared to mourn,
    And whispering pines made vows for thy return.

                                TITYRUS.

    What should I do?--While here I was enchained,
    No glimpse of godlike liberty remained;
    Nor could I hope, in any place but there,
    To find a god so present to my prayer.
    There first the youth of heavenly birth I viewed,[295]
    For whom our monthly victims are renewed.
    He heard my vows, and graciously decreed
    My grounds to be restored, my former flocks to feed.

                               MELIBOEUS.

    O fortunate old man! whose farm remains--                          }
    For you sufficient--and requites your pains;                       }
    Though rushes overspread the neighbouring plains,                  }
    Though here the marshy grounds approach your fields,
    And there the soil a stony harvest yields.
    Your teeming ewes shall no strange meadows try,
    Nor fear a rot from tainted company.
    Behold! yon bordering fence of sallow trees
    Is fraught with flowers, the flowers are fraught with bees;
    The busy bees, with a soft murmuring strain,
    Invite to gentle sleep the labouring swain.
    While, from the neighbouring rock, with rural songs,
    The pruner's voice the pleasing dream prolongs,
    Stock-doves and turtles tell their amorous pain,
    And, from the lofty elms, of love complain.

                                TITYRUS.

    The inhabitants of seas and skies shall change,
    And fish on shore, and stags in air, shall range,
    The banished Parthian dwell on Arar's brink,
    And the blue German shall the Tigris drink,
    Ere I, forsaking gratitude and truth,
    Forget the figure of that godlike youth.

                               MELIBOEUS.

    But we must beg our bread in climes unknown,
    Beneath the scorching or the freezing zone;
    And some to far Oaxis shall be sold,
    Or try the Libyan heat, or Scythian cold;
    The rest among the Britons be confined,
    A race of men from all the world disjoined.
    O! must the wretched exiles ever mourn,
    Nor, after length of rolling years, return?
    Are we condemned by fate's unjust decree,
    No more our houses and our homes to see?
    Or shall we mount again the rural throne,
    And rule the country kingdoms, once our own?
    Did we for these barbarians plant and sow?                         }
    On these, on these, our happy fields bestow?                       }
    Good heaven! what dire effects from civil discord flow!            }
    Now let me graff my pears, and prune the vine;
    The fruit is theirs, the labour only mine.
    Farewell, my pastures, my paternal stock,
    My fruitful fields, and my more fruitful flock!
    No more, my goats, shall I behold you climb
    The steepy cliffs, or crop the flowery thyme!
    No more, extended in the grot below,
    Shall see you browzing on the mountain's brow
    The prickly shrubs; and after on the bare,
    Lean down the deep abyss, and hang in air.
    No more my sheep shall sip the morning dew;                        }
    No more my song shall please the rural crew:                       }
    Adieu, my tuneful pipe! and all the world, adieu!                  }

                                TITYRUS.

    This night, at least, with me forget your care;
    Chesnuts, and curds and cream, shall be your fare:
    The carpet-ground shall be with leaves o'erspread,
    And boughs shall weave a covering for your head.
    For see yon sunny hill the shade extends,
    And curling smoke from cottages ascends.

FOOTNOTES:

[295] Virgil means Octavius Cæsar, heir to Julius, who perhaps had not
arrived to his twentieth year, when Virgil saw him first. _Vide_ his
Life. _Of heavenly birth_, or heavenly blood, because the Julian family
was derived from Iülus, son to Æneas, and grandson to Venus.




PASTORAL II.

OR,

_ALEXIS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _The commentators can by no means agree on the person of
      Alexis, but are all of opinion that some beautiful youth is
      meant by him, to whom Virgil here makes love, in Corydon's
      language and simplicity. His way of courtship is wholly
      pastoral: he complains of the boy's coyness; recommends
      himself for his beauty and skill in piping; invites the
      youth into the country, where he promises him the diversions
      of the place, with a suitable present of nuts and apples.
      But when he finds nothing will prevail, he resolves to quit
      his troublesome amour, and betake himself again to his
      former business._

    Young Corydon, the unhappy shepherd swain,
    The fair Alexis loved, but loved in vain;
    And underneath the beechen shade, alone,
    Thus to the woods and mountains made his moan:--
    Is this, unkind Alexis, my reward?
    And must I die unpitied, and unheard?
    Now the green lizard in the grove is laid,
    The sheep enjoy the coolness of the shade,
    And Thestylis wild thyme and garlic beats
    For harvest hinds, o'erspent with toil and heats;
    While in the scorching sun I trace in vain
    Thy flying footsteps o'er the burning plain.
    The creaking locusts with my voice conspire,
    They fried with heat, and I with fierce desire.
    How much more easy was it to sustain
    Proud Amaryllis, and her haughty reign,
    The scorns of young Menalcas, once my care,
    Though he was black, and thou art heavenly fair.
    Trust not too much to that enchanting face;
    Beauty's a charm, but soon the charm will pass.
    White lilies lie neglected on the plain,
    While dusky hyacinths for use remain.
    My passion is thy scorn; nor wilt thou know
    What wealth I have, what gifts I can bestow;
    What stores my dairies and my folds contain--
    A thousand lambs, that wander on the plain;
    New milk, that all the winter never fails,
    And all the summer overflows the pails.
    Amphion sung not sweeter to his herd,
    When summoned stones the Theban turrets reared.
    Nor am I so deformed; for late I stood
    Upon the margin of the briny flood:
    The winds were still; and, if the glass be true,
    With Daphnis I may vie, though judged by you.
    O leave the noisy town! O come and see
    Our country cots, and live content with me!
    To wound the flying deer, and from their cotes
    With me to drive a-field the browzing goats;
    To pipe and sing, and, in our country strain,
    To copy, or perhaps contend with Pan.
    Pan taught to join with wax unequal reeds;
    Pan loves the shepherds, and their flocks he feeds.
    Nor scorn the pipe: Amyntas, to be taught,
    With all his kisses would my skill have bought.
    Of seven smooth joints a mellow pipe I have,
    Which with his dying breath Damoetas gave,
    And said,--"This, Corydon, I leave to thee;
    For only thou deserv'st it after me."
    His eyes Amyntas durst not upward lift;
    For much he grudged the praise, but more the gift.
    Besides, two kids, that in the valley strayed,
    I found by chance, and to my fold conveyed:
    They drain two bagging udders every day;
    And these shall be companions of thy play;
    Both fleck'd with white, the true Arcadian strain,
    Which Thestylis had often begged in vain:
    And she shall have them, if again she sues,
    Since you the giver and the gift refuse.
    Come to my longing arms, my lovely care!
    And take the presents which the nymphs prepare.
    White lilies in full canisters they bring,
    With all the glories of the purple spring.
    The daughters of the flood have searched the mead
    For violets pale, and cropp'd the poppy's head,
    The short narcissus[296] and fair daffodil,
    Pancies to please the sight, and cassia sweet to smell;
    And set soft hyacinths with iron blue,
    To shade marsh marigolds of shining hue;
    Some bound in order, others loosely strowed,
    To dress thy bower, and trim thy new abode.
    Myself will search our planted grounds at home,
    For downy peaches and the glossy plum;
    And thrash the chesnuts in the neighbouring grove,
    Such as my Amaryllis used to love.
    The laurel and the myrtle sweets agree,
    And both in nosegays shall be bound for thee.
    Ah, Corydon! ah, poor unhappy swain!
    Alexis will thy homely gifts disdain:
    Nor, should'st thou offer all thy little store,
    Will rich Iolas yield, but offer more.
    What have I done, to name that wealthy swain?
    So powerful are his presents, mine so mean!
    The boar, amidst my crystal streams, I bring;
    And southern winds to blast my flowery spring.
    Ah, cruel creature! whom dost thou despise?
    The gods, to live in woods, have left the skies;
    And godlike Paris, in the Idæan grove,
    To Priam's wealth preferred OEnone's love.
    In cities, which she built, let Pallas reign;
    Towers are for gods, but forests for the swain.
    The greedy lioness the wolf pursues,
    The wolf the kid, the wanton kid the browze;
    Alexis, thou art chased by Corydon:
    All follow several games, and each his own.
    See, from afar, the fields no longer smoke;
    The sweating steers, unharnessed from the yoke,
    Bring, as in triumph, back the crooked plough;
    The shadows lengthen as the sun goes low;
    Cool breezes now the raging heats remove:
    Ah, cruel heaven, that made no cure for love!
    I wish for balmy sleep, but wish in vain;
    Love has no bounds in pleasure, or in pain.
    What frenzy, shepherd, has thy soul possessed?
    Thy vineyard lies half pruned, and half undressed.
    Quench, Corydon, thy long unanswered fire!
    Mind what the common wants of life require;
    On willow twigs employ thy weaving care,
    And find an easier love, though not so fair.

FOOTNOTES:

[296] That is, of short continuance.




PASTORAL III.

OR,

_PALÆMON_.

MENALCAS, DAMOETAS, PALÆMON.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _Damoetas and Menalcas, after some smart strokes of country
      raillery, resolve to try who has the most skill at song;
      and accordingly make their neighbour, Palæmon, judge of
      their performances; who, after a full hearing of both
      parties, declares himself unfit for the decision of so
      weighty a controversy, and leaves the victory undetermined._

                               MENALCAS.

    Ho, swain! what shepherd owns those ragged sheep?

                               DAMOETAS.

    Ægon's they are: he gave them me to keep.

                               MENALCAS.

    Unhappy sheep, of an unhappy swain!                                }
    While he Neæra courts, but courts in vain,                         }
    And fears that I the damsel shall obtain.                          }
    Thou, varlet, dost thy master's gains devour;
    Thou milk'st his ewes, and often twice an hour;
    Of grass and fodder thou defraud'st the dams,
    And of their mothers' dugs the starving lambs.

                               DAMOETAS.

    Good words, young catamite, at least to men.
    We know who did your business, how, and when;
    And in what chapel too you played your prize,                      }
    And what the goats observed with leering eyes:                     }
    The nymphs were kind, and laughed; and there your safety lies.     }

                               MENALCAS.

    Yes, when I cropt the hedges of the leys,
    Cut Micon's tender vines, and stole the stays!

                               DAMOETAS.

    Or rather, when, beneath yon ancient oak,
    The bow of Daphnis, and the shafts, you broke,
    When the fair boy received the gift of right;
    And, but for mischief, you had died for spite.

                               MENALCAS.

    What nonsense would the fool, thy master, prate,
    When thou, his knave, canst talk at such a rate!
    Did I not see you, rascal, did I not,
    When you lay snug to snap young Damon's goat?
    His mongrel barked; I ran to his relief,
    And cried,--"There, there he goes! stop, stop the thief!"
    Discovered, and defeated of your prey,
    You skulked behind the fence, and sneaked away.

                               DAMOETAS.

    An honest man may freely take his own:
    The goat was mine, by singing fairly won.
    A solemn match was made; he lost the prize.                        }
    Ask Damon, ask, if he the debt denies.                             }
    I think he dares not; if he does, he lies.                         }

                               MENALCAS.

    Thou sing with him? thou booby!--Never pipe
    Was so profaned to touch that blubbered lip.
    Dunce at the best! in streets but scarce allowed
    To tickle, on thy straw, the stupid crowd.

                               DAMOETAS.

    To bring it to the trial, will you dare
    Our pipes, our skill, our voices, to compare?
    My brinded heifer to the stake I lay;
    Two thriving calves she suckles twice a day,
    And twice besides her beestings never fail
    To store the dairy with a brimming pail.
    Now back your singing with an equal stake.

                               MENALCAS.

    That should be seen, if I had one to make.
    You know too well, I feed my father's flock;
    What can I wager from the common stock?
    A stepdame too I have, a cursed she,
    Who rules my hen-peck'd sire, and orders me.
    Both number twice a day the milky dams;
    And once she takes the tale of all the lambs.
    But, since you will be mad, and since you may
    Suspect my courage, if I should not lay,
    The pawn I proffer shall be full as good:
    Two bowls I have, well turned, of beechen wood;
    Both by divine Alcimedon were made;
    To neither of them yet the lip is laid.
    The lids are ivy; grapes in clusters lurk
    Beneath the carving of the curious work.
    Two figures on the sides embossed appear--                         }
    Conon, and what's his name who made the sphere,                    }
    And shewed the seasons of the sliding year,                        }
    Instructed in his trade the labouring swain,
    And when to reap, and when to sow the grain?

                               DAMOETAS.

    And I have two, to match your pair, at home;
    The wood the same; from the same hand they come,
    (The kimbo handles seem with bear's foot carved,)
    And never yet to table have been served;
    Where Orpheus on his lyre laments his love,
    With beasts encompassed, and a dancing grove.
    But these, nor all the proffers you can make,
    Are worth the heifer which I set to stake.

                               MENALCAS.

    No more delays, vain boaster, but begin!
    I prophesy before-hand, I shall win.
    Palæmon shall be judge how ill you rhyme:
    I'll teach you how to brag another time.

                               DAMOETAS.

    Rhymer, come on! and do the worst you can;
    I fear not you, nor yet a better man.
    With silence, neighbour, and attention, wait;
    For 'tis a business of a high debate.

                                PALÆMON.

    Sing then; the shade affords a proper place,
    The trees are clothed with leaves, the fields with grass,
    The blossoms blow, the birds on bushes sing,
    And Nature has accomplished all the spring.
    The challenge to Damoetas shall belong;
    Menalcas shall sustain his under-song;
    Each in his turn your tuneful numbers bring,
    By turns the tuneful Muses love to sing.

                               DAMOETAS.

    From the great father of the gods above
    My Muse begins; for all is full of Jove:
    To Jove the care of heaven and earth belongs;
    My flocks he blesses, and he loves my songs.

                               MENALCAS.

    Me Phoebus loves; for he my Muse inspires,
    And in her songs the warmth he gave requires.
    For him, the god of shepherds and their sheep,[297]
    My blushing hyacinths and my bays I keep.

                               DAMOETAS.

    My Phyllis me with pelted apples plies;                            }
    Then tripping to the woods the wanton hies,                        }
    And wishes to be seen before she flies.                            }

                               MENALCAS.

    But fair Amyntas comes unasked to me,                              }
    And offers love, and sits upon my knee.                            }
    Not Delia to my dogs is known so well as he.                       }

                               DAMOETAS.

    To the dear mistress of my love-sick mind,
    Her swain a pretty present has designed:
    I saw two stock-doves billing, and ere long
    Will take the nest, and hers shall be the young.

                               MENALCAS.

    Ten ruddy wildings in the wood I found,
    And stood on tip-toes, reaching from the ground:
    I sent Amyntas all my present store;
    And will, to-morrow, send as many more.


    The lovely maid lay panting in my arms,
    And all she said and did was full of charms.
    Winds! on your wings to heaven her accents bear;
    Such words as heaven alone is fit to hear.

                               MENALCAS.

    Ah! what avails it me, my love's delight,
    To call you mine, when absent from my sight?
    I hold the nets, while you pursue the prey,
    And must not share the dangers of the day.

                               DAMOETAS.

    I keep my birth-day; send my Phyllis home;
    At shearing-time, Iolas, you may come.

                               MENALCAS.

    With Phyllis I am more in grace than you;                          }
    Her sorrow did my parting steps pursue:                            }
    "Adieu, my dear!" she said, "a long adieu!"                        }

                               DAMOETAS.

    The nightly wolf is baneful to the fold,
    Storms to the wheat, to buds the bitter cold;
    But, from my frowning fair, more ills I find,
    Than from the wolves, and storms, and winter-wind.

                               MENALCAS.

    The kids with pleasure browze the bushy plain;
    The showers are grateful to the swelling grain;
    To teeming ewes the sallow's tender tree;
    But, more than all the world, my love to me.

                               DAMOETAS.

    Pollio my rural verse vouchsafes to read:
    A heifer, Muses, for your patron breed.

                               MENALCAS.

    My Pollio writes himself:--a bull be bred,
    With spurning heels, and with a butting head.

                               DAMOETAS.

    Who Pollio loves, and who his Muse admires,
    Let Pollio's fortune crown his full desires.
    Let myrrh instead of thorn his fences fill,
    And showers of honey from his oaks distil.

                               MENALCAS.

    Who hates not living Bavius, let him be
    (Dead Mævius!) damn'd to love thy works and thee!
    The same ill taste of sense would serve to join
    Dog-foxes in the yoke, and shear the swine.

                               DAMOETAS.

    Ye boys, who pluck the flowers, and spoil the spring,
    Beware the secret snake that shoots a sting.

                               MENALCAS.

    Graze not too near the banks, my jolly sheep;
    The ground is false, the running streams are deep:
    See, they have caught the father of the flock,
    Who dries his fleece upon the neighbouring rock.

                               DAMOETAS.

    From rivers drive the kids, and sling your hook;
    Anon I'll wash them in the shallow brook.

                               MENALCAS.

    To fold, my flock!--when milk is dried with heat,
    In vain the milkmaid tugs an empty teat.

                               DAMOETAS.

    How lank my bulls from plenteous pasture come!
    But love, that drains the herd, destroys the groom.

                               MENALCAS.

    My flocks are free from love, yet look so thin,
    Their bones are barely covered with their skin.
    What magic has bewitched the woolly dams,
    And what ill eyes beheld the tender lambs?

                               DAMOETAS.

    Say, where the round of heaven, which all contains,                }
    To three short ells on earth our sight restrains:                  }
    Tell that, and rise a Phoebus for thy pains.                       }

                               MENALCAS.

    Nay, tell me first, in what new region springs
    A flower, that bears inscribed the names of kings;
    And thou shalt gain a present as divine
    As Phoebus' self; for Phyllis shall be thine.

                                PALÆMON.

    So nice a difference in your singing lies,
    That both have won, or both deserved the prize.
    Rest equal happy both; and all who prove
    The bitter sweets, and pleasing pains, of love.
    Now dam the ditches, and the floods restrain;
    Their moisture has already drenched the plain.

FOOTNOTES:

[297] Phoebus, not Pan, is here called the god of shepherds. The poet
alludes to the same story which he touches in the beginning of the
Second Georgic, where he calls Phoebus the Amphrysian shepherd, because
he fed the sheep and oxen of Admetus, with whom he was in love, on the
hill Amphrysus.




PASTORAL IV.

OR,

_POLLIO_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _The Poet celebrates the birth-day of Saloninus, the son of
      Pollio, born in the consulship of his father, after the
      taking of Salonæ, a city in Dalmatia. Many of the verses
      are translated from one of the Sibyls, who prophesied of
      our Saviour's birth._

    Sicilian Muse, begin a loftier strain!
    Though lowly shrubs, and trees that shade the plain,
    Delight not all; Sicilian Muse, prepare
    To make the vocal woods deserve a consul's care.
    The last great age, foretold by sacred rhymes,
    Renews its finished course: Saturnian times
    Roll round again; and mighty years, begun
    From their first orb, in radiant circles run.
    The base degenerate iron offspring ends;
    A golden progeny from heaven descends.
    O chaste Lucina! speed the mother's pains;
    And haste the glorious birth! thy own Apollo reigns!
    The lovely boy, with his auspicious face,                          }
    Shall Pollio's consulship and triumph grace;                       }
    Majestic months set out with him to their appointed race.          }
    The father banished virtue shall restore,
    And crimes shall threat the guilty world no more.
    The son shall lead the life of gods, and be
    By gods and heroes seen, and gods and heroes see.
    The jarring nations he in peace shall bind,
    And with paternal virtues rule mankind.
    Unbidden earth shall wreathing ivy bring,                          }
    And fragrant herbs, (the promises of spring,)                      }
    As her first offerings to her infant king.                         }
    The goats with strutting dugs shall homeward speed,
    And lowing herds secure from lions feed.
    His cradle shall with rising flowers be crowned:
    The serpent's brood shall die; the sacred ground
    Shall weeds and poisonous plants refuse to bear;
    Each common bush shall Syrian roses wear.
    But when heroic verse his youth shall raise,
    And form it to hereditary praise,
    Unlaboured harvests shall the fields adorn,
    And clustered grapes shall blush on every thorn;
    The knotted oaks shall showers of honey weep;
    And through the matted grass the liquid gold shall creep.
    Yet, of old fraud some footsteps shall remain;
    The merchant still shall plough the deep for gain,
    Great cities shall with walls be compassed round,
    And sharpened shares shall vex the fruitful ground;
    Another Tiphys shall new seas explore;
    Another Argo land the chiefs upon the Iberian shore;
    Another Helen other wars create,
    And great Achilles urge the Trojan fate.
    But when to ripened manhood he shall grow,
    The greedy sailor shall the seas forego;
    No keel shall cut the waves for foreign ware,
    For every soil shall every product bear.
    The labouring hind his oxen shall disjoin;                         }
    No plough shall hurt the glebe, no pruning-hook the vine;          }
    Nor wool shall in dissembled colours shine;                        }
    But the luxurious father of the fold,
    With native purple, and unborrowed gold,
    Beneath his pompous fleece shall proudly sweat;
    And under Tyrian robes the lamb shall bleat.
    The Fates, when they this happy web have spun,
    Shall bless the sacred clue, and bid it smoothly run.
    Mature in years, to ready honours move,
    O of celestial seed! O foster-son of Jove!
    See, labouring Nature calls thee to sustain
    The nodding frame of heaven, and earth, and main!
    See to their base restored, earth, seas, and air;
    And joyful ages, from behind, in crowding ranks appear.
    To sing thy praise, would heaven my breath prolong,
    Infusing spirits worthy such a song,
    Not Thracian Orpheus should transcend my lays,
    Nor Linus crowned with never-fading bays;
    Though each his heavenly parent should inspire;
    The Muse instruct the voice, and Phoebus tune the lyre.
    Should Pan contend in verse, and thou my theme,
    Arcadian judges should their god condemn.
    Begin, auspicious boy! to cast about
    Thy infant eyes, and, with a smile, thy mother single out.[298]
    Thy mother well deserves that short delight,
    The nauseous qualms of ten long months and travail to requite.
    Then smile! the frowning infant's doom is read;
    No god shall crown the board, nor goddess bless the bed.


FOOTNOTES:

[298] In Latin thus,

         _Incipe, parve puer, risu cognoscere matrem_, &c.

I have translated the passage to this sense--that the infant, smiling
on his mother, singles her out from the rest of the company about
him. Erythræus, Bembus, and Joseph Scaliger, are of this opinion. Yet
they and I may be mistaken; for, immediately after, we find these
words, _cui non risere parentes_, which imply another sense, as if
the parents smiled on the new-born infant; and that the babe on whom
they vouchsafed not to smile, was born to ill fortune: for they tell a
story, that, when Vulcan, the only son of Jupiter and Juno, came into
the world, he was so hard-favoured, that both his parents frowned on
him, and Jupiter threw him out of heaven: he fell on the island Lemnos,
and was lame ever afterwards. The last line of the Pastoral seems to
justify this sense:

        _Nec Deus hunc mensâ, Dea nec dignata cubili est._

For, though he married Venus, yet his mother Juno was not present at
the nuptials to bless them; as appears by his wife's incontinence. They
say also, that he was banished from the banquets of the gods. If so,
that punishment could be of no long continuance; for Homer makes him
present at their feasts, and composing a quarrel betwixt his parents,
with a bowl of nectar. The matter is of no great consequence; and
therefore I adhere to my translation, for these two reasons: first,
Virgil has his following line,

           _Matri longa decem tulerunt fastidia menses_,

as if the infant's smiling on his mother was a reward to her for
bearing him ten months in her body, four weeks longer than the usual
time. Secondly, Catullus is cited by Joseph Scaliger, as favouring this
opinion, in his Epithalamium of Manlius Torquatus:

    _Torquatus, volo, parvolus,
    Matris e gremio suæ
    Porrigens teneras manus,
    Dulce rideat ad patrem_, &c.

What if I should steer betwixt the two extremes, and conclude, that the
infant, who was to be happy, must not only smile on his parents, but
also they on him? For Scaliger notes, that the infants who smiled not
at their birth, were observed to be #agelastoi#, or sullen, (as I have
translated it,) during all their life; and Servius, and almost all the
modern commentators, affirm, that no child was thought fortunate, on
whom his parents smiled not at his birth. I observe, farther, that the
ancients thought the infant, who came into the world at the end of the
tenth month, was born to some extraordinary fortune, good or bad. Such
was the birth of the late prince of Condé's father, of whom his mother
was not brought to bed, till almost eleven months were expired after
his father's death; yet the college of physicians at Paris concluded
he was lawfully begotten. My ingenious friend, Anthony Henley, Esq.
desired me to make a note on this passage of Virgil; adding, (what I
had not read,) that the Jews have been so superstitious, as to observe
not only the first look or action of an infant, but also the first word
which the parent, or any of the assistants, spoke after the birth; and
from thence they gave a name to the child, alluding to it.




PASTORAL V.

OR,

_DAPHNIS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _Mopsus and Menalcas, two very expert shepherds at a song,
      begin one by consent to the memory of Daphnis, who is
      supposed by the best critics to represent Julius Cæsar.
      Mopsus laments his death; Menalcas proclaims his divinity;
      the whole eclogue consisting of an elegy and an apotheosis._

                               MENALCAS.

    Since on the downs our flocks together feed,
    And since my voice can match your tuneful reed,
    Why sit we not beneath the grateful shade,
    Which hazles, intermixed with elms, have made?

                                MOPSUS.

    Whether you please that sylvan scene to take,
    Where whistling winds uncertain shadows make;
    Or will you to the cooler cave succeed,
    Whose mouth the curling vines have overspread?

                               MENALCAS.

    Your merit and your years command the choice;
    Amyntas only rivals you in voice.

                                MOPSUS.

    What will not that presuming shepherd dare,
    Who thinks his voice with Phoebus may compare?

                               MENALCAS.

    Begin you first; if either Alcon's praise,
    Or dying Phyllis, have inspired your lays;
    If her you mourn, or Codrus you commend,
    Begin, and Tityrus your flock shall tend.

                                MOPSUS.

    Or shall I rather the sad verse repeat,
    Which on the beeches bark I lately writ?
    I writ, and sung betwixt. Now bring the swain,
    Whose voice you boast, and let him try the strain.

                               MENALCAS.

    Such as the shrub to the tall olive shows,
    Or the pale swallow to the blushing rose;
    Such is his voice, if I can judge aright,
    Compared to thine, in sweetness and in height.

                                MOPSUS.

    No more, but sit and hear the promised lay;
    The gloomy grotto makes a doubtful day.
    The nymphs about the breathless body wait
    Of Daphnis, and lament his cruel fate.
    The trees and floods were witness to their tears;
    At length the rumour reached his mother's ears.
    The wretched parent, with a pious haste,
    Came running, and his lifeless limbs embraced.
    She sighed, she sobbed; and, furious with despair,                 }
    She rent her garments, and she tore her hair,                      }
    Accusing all the gods, and every star.                             }
    The swains forgot their sheep, nor near the brink
    Of running waters brought their herds to drink.
    The thirsty cattle, of themselves, abstained
    From water, and their grassy fare disdained.
    The death of Daphnis woods and hills deplore;                      }
    They cast the sound to Libya's desert shore;                       }
    The Libyan lions hear, and hearing roar.                           }
    Fierce tigers Daphnis taught the yoke to bear,
    And first with curling ivy dressed the spear.
    Daphnis did rites to Bacchus first ordain,
    And holy revels for his reeling train.
    As vines the trees, as grapes the vines adorn,
    As bulls the herds, and fields the yellow corn;
    So bright a splendour, so divine a grace,
    The glorious Daphnis cast on his illustrious race.
    When envious Fate the godlike Daphnis took,
    Our guardian gods the fields and plains forsook;
    Pales no longer swelled the teeming grain,
    Nor Phoebus fed his oxen on the plain;
    No fruitful crop the sickly fields return,
    But oats and darnel choke the rising corn;
    And where the vales with violets once were crowned,
    Now knotty burrs and thorns disgrace the ground.
    Come, shepherds, come, and strow with leaves the plain;
    Such funeral rites your Daphnis did ordain.
    With cypress-boughs the crystal fountains hide,
    And softly let the running waters glide.
    A lasting monument to Daphnis raise,
    With this inscription to record his praise:--
    "Daphnis, the fields' delight, the shepherds' love,
    Renowned on earth, and deified above;
    Whose flock excelled the fairest on the plains,
    But less than he himself surpassed the swains."

                               MENALCAS.

    O heavenly poet! such thy verse appears,
    So sweet, so charming to my ravished ears,
    As to the weary swain, with cares opprest,
    Beneath the sylvan shade, refreshing rest;
    As to the feverish traveller, when first
    He finds a crystal stream to quench his thirst.
    In singing, as in piping, you excel;
    And scarce your master could perform so well.
    O fortunate young man! at least your lays
    Are next to his, and claim the second praise.
    Such as they are, my rural songs I join,
    To raise our Daphnis to the powers divine;
    For Daphnis was so good, to love whate'er was mine.

                                MOPSUS.

    How is my soul with such a promise raised!
    For both the boy was worthy to be praised,
    And Stimicon has often made me long
    To hear, like him, so soft, so sweet a song.

                               MENALCAS.

    Daphnis, the guest of heaven, with wondering eyes,
    Views, in the milky way, the starry skies,
    And far beneath him, from the shining sphere,
    Beholds the moving clouds, and rolling year.
    For this with cheerful cries the woods resound,                    }
    The purple spring arrays the various ground,                       }
    The nymphs and shepherds dance, and Pan himself is crowned.        }
    The wolf no longer prowls for nightly spoils,
    Nor bird's the springes fear, nor stags the toils;
    For Daphnis reigns above, and deals from thence
    His mother's milder beams, and peaceful influence.
    The mountain-tops unshorn, the rocks, rejoice;
    The lowly shrubs partake of human voice.
    Assenting Nature, with a gracious nod,
    Proclaims him, and salutes the new-admitted god.
    Be still propitious, ever good to thine!
    Behold! four hallowed altars we design;
    And two to thee, and two to Phoebus rise;
    On both is offered annual sacrifice.
    The holy priests, at each returning year,
    Two bowls of milk, and two of oil, shall bear;
    And I myself the guests with friendly bowls will cheer.
    Two goblets will I crown with sparkling wine,                      }
    The generous vintage of the Chian vine:                            }
    These will I pour to thee, and make the nectar thine.              }
    In winter shall the genial feast be made
    Before the fire; by summer, in the shade.
    Damoetas shall perform the rites divine,
    And Lyctian Ægon in the song shall join.
    Alphesiboeus, tripping, shall advance,
    And mimic Satyrs in his antic dance.
    When to the nymphs our annual rites we pay,
    And when our fields with victims we survey;
    While savage boars delight in shady woods,
    And finny fish inhabit in the floods;
    While bees on thyme, and locusts feed on dew--
    Thy grateful swains these honours shall renew.
    Such honours as we pay to powers divine,
    To Bacchus and to Ceres, shall be thine.
    Such annual honours shall be given; and thou
    Shalt hear, and shalt condemn thy suppliants to their vow.

                                MOPSUS.

    What present, worth thy verse, can Mopsus find?
    Not the soft whispers of the southern wind,
    That play through trembling trees, delight me more;
    Nor murmuring billows on the sounding shore,
    Nor winding streams, that through the valley glide,
    And the scarce-covered pebbles gently chide.

                               MENALCAS.

    Receive you first this tuneful pipe, the same
    That played my Corydon's unhappy flame;
    The same that sung Neæra's conquering eyes,
    And, had the judge been just, had won the prize.

                                MOPSUS.

    Accept from me this sheep-hook in exchange;
    The handle brass, the knobs in equal range.
    Antigenes, with kisses, often tried                                }
    To beg this present, in his beauty's pride,                        }
    When youth and love are hard to be denied.                         }
    But what I could refuse to his request,
    Is yours unasked, for you deserve it best.




PASTORAL VI.

OR,

_SILENUS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _Two young shepherds, Chromis and Mnasylus, having been
      often promised a song by Silenus, chance to catch him
      asleep in this Pastoral; where they bind him hand and
      foot, and then claim his promise. Silenus, finding they
      would be put off no longer, begins his song, in which he
      describes the formation of the universe, and the original of
      animals, according to the Epicurean philosophy; and then
      runs through the most surprising transformations which
      have happened in Nature since her birth. This Pastoral
      was designed as a compliment to Syron the Epicurean, who
      instructed Virgil and Varus in the principles of that
      philosophy. Silenus acts as tutor, Chromis and Mnasylus as
      the two pupils._[299]

    I first transferred to Rome Sicilian strains;
    Nor blushed the Doric Muse to dwell on Mantuan plains.
    But when I tried her tender voice, too young,
    And fighting kings and bloody battles sung,
    Apollo checked my pride, and bade me feed
    My fattening flocks, nor dare beyond the reed.
    Admonished thus, while every pen prepares
    To write thy praises, Varus, and thy wars,
    My pastoral Muse her humble tribute brings,
    And yet not wholly uninspired she sings;
    For all who read, and, reading, not disdain
    These rural poems, and their lowly strain,
    The name of Varus oft inscribed shall see                          }
    In every grove, and every vocal tree,                              }
    And all the sylvan reign shall sing of thee:                       }
    Thy name, to Phoebus and the Muses known,                          }
    Shall in the front of every page be shown;                         }
    For he, who sings thy praise, secures his own.                     }
    Proceed, my Muse!--Two Satyrs, on the ground,
    Stretched at his ease, their sire Silenus found.
    Dozed with his fumes, and heavy with his load,                     }
    They found him snoring in his dark abode,                          }
    And seized with youthful arms the drunken god.                     }
    His rosy wreath was dropt not long before,
    Borne by the tide of wine, and floating on the floor.
    His empty can, with ears half worn away,
    Was hung on high, to boast the triumph of the day.
    Invaded thus, for want of better bands,
    His garland they unstring, and bind his hands;
    For, by the fraudful god deluded long,
    They now resolve to have their promised song.
    Ægle came in, to make their party good--
    The fairest Naïs of the neighbouring flood--
    And, while he stares around with stupid eyes,
    His brows with berries, and his temples, dyes.
    He finds the fraud, and, with a smile, demands,
    On what design the boys had bound his hands.
    "Loose me," he cried, "'twas impudence to find
    A sleeping god; 'tis sacrilege to bind.
    To you the promised poem I will pay;
    The nymph shall be rewarded in her way."
    He raised his voice; and soon a numerous throng
    Of tripping Satyrs crowded to the song;
    And sylvan Fauns, and savage beasts, advanced;
    And nodding forests to the numbers danced.
    Not by Hæmonian hills the Thracian bard,                           }
    Nor awful Phoebus was on Pindus heard                              }
    With deeper silence, or with more regard.                          }
    He sung the secret seeds of Nature's frame;
    How seas, and earth, and air, and active flame,
    Fell through the mighty void, and, in their fall,
    Were blindly gathered in this goodly ball.
    The tender soil then, stiffening by degrees,
    Shut from the bounded earth the bounding seas.
    Then earth and ocean various forms disclose,
    And a new sun to the new world arose;
    And mists, condensed to clouds, obscure the sky;
    And clouds, dissolved, the thirsty ground supply.
    The rising trees the lofty mountains grace;                        }
    The lofty mountains feed the savage race,                          }
    Yet few, and strangers, in the unpeopled place.                    }
    From thence the birth of man the song pursued,
    And how the world was lost, and how renewed;
    The reign of Saturn, and the golden age;
    Prometheus' theft, and Jove's avenging rage;
    The cries of Argonauts for Hylas drowned,
    With whose repeated name the shores resound;
    Then mourns the madness of the Cretan queen,--
    Happy for her if herds had never been.
    What fury, wretched woman, seized thy breast?
    The maids of Argos, (though, with rage possessed,
    Their imitated lowings filled the grove,)
    Yet shunned the guilt of thy preposterous love,
    Nor sought the youthful husband of the herd,                       }
    Though labouring yokes on their own necks they feared,             }
    And felt for budding horns on their smooth foreheads reared.       }
    Ah, wretched queen! you range the pathless wood,
    While on a flowery bank he chews the cud,
    Or sleeps in shades, or through the forest roves,
    And roars with anguish for his absent loves.
    "Ye nymphs, with toils his forest-walk surround,
    And trace his wandering footsteps on the ground.
    But, ah! perhaps my passion he disdains,
    And courts the milky mothers of the plains.
    We search the ungrateful fugitive abroad,
    While they at home sustain his happy load."
    He sung the lover's fraud; the longing maid,
    With golden fruit, like all the sex, betrayed;
    The sisters mourning for their brother's loss;
    Their bodies hid in barks, and furred with moss;
    How each a rising alder now appears,
    And o'er the Po distils her gummy tears:
    Then sung, how Gallus, by a Muse's hand,
    Was led and welcomed to the sacred strand;
    The senate rising to salute their guest;
    And Linus thus their gratitude expressed:--
    "Receive this present, by the Muses made,
    The pipe on which the Ascræan pastor played;
    With which of old he charmed the savage train,
    And called the mountain-ashes to the plain.
    Sing thou, on this, thy Phoebus; and the wood
    Where once his fane of Parian marble stood:
    On this his ancient oracles rehearse,
    And with new numbers grace the god of verse."
    Why should I sing the double Scylla's fate?
    The first by love transformed, the last by hate--
    A beauteous maid above; but magic arts
    With barking dogs deformed her nether parts:
    What vengeance on the passing fleet she poured,
    The master frighted, and the mates devoured.
    Then ravished Philomel the song exprest;
    The crime revealed; the sisters' cruel feast:
    And how in fields the lapwing Tereus reigns,
    The warbling nightingale in woods complains;
    While Procne makes on chimney-tops her moan,
    And hovers o'er the palace once her own.
    Whatever songs besides the Delphian god
    Had taught the laurels, and the Spartan flood,
    Silenus sung: the vales his voice rebound,
    And carry to the skies the sacred sound.
    And now the setting sun had warned the swain                       }
    To call his counted cattle from the plain:                         }
    Yet still the unwearied sire pursues the tuneful strain,           }
    Till, unperceived, the heavens with stars were hung,
    And sudden night surprised the yet unfinished song.

FOOTNOTES:

[299] My Lord Roscommon's notes on this Pastoral are equal to his
excellent translation of it; and thither I refer the reader.

The Eighth and Tenth Pastorals are already translated, to all manner
of advantage, by my excellent friend Mr Stafford. So is the episode of
Camilla, in the Eleventh Æneïd.




PASTORAL VII.

OR,

_MELIBOEUS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _Meliboeus here gives us the relation of a sharp poetical
      contest between Thyrsis and Corydon, at which he himself
      and Daphnis were present; who both declared for Corydon._

    Beneath a holm, repaired two jolly swains,
    (Their sheep and goats together grazed the plains,)
    Both young Arcadians, both alike inspired
    To sing, and answer as the song required.
    Daphnis, as umpire, took the middle seat,
    And fortune thither led my weary feet;
    For, while I fenced my myrtles from the cold,
    The father of my flock had wandered from the fold.
    Of Daphnis I inquired: he, smiling, said,
    "Dismiss your fear;" and pointed where he fed:
    "And, if no greater cares disturb your mind,
    Sit here with us, in covert of the wind.
    Your lowing heifers, of their own accord,
    At watering time will seek the neighbouring ford.
    Here wanton Mincius winds along the meads,
    And shades his happy banks with bending reeds.
    And see, from yon old oak that mates the skies,
    How black the clouds of swarming bees arise."
    What should I do? nor was Alcippe nigh,
    Nor absent Phyllis could my care supply,
    To house, and feed by hand my weaning lambs,
    And drain the strutting udders of their dams.
    Great was the strife betwixt the singing swains;
    And I preferred my pleasure to my gains.
    Alternate rhyme the ready champions chose:
    These Corydon rehearsed, and Thyrsis those.

                                CORYDON.

    Ye Muses, ever fair, and ever young,
    Assist my numbers, and inspire my song.
    With all my Codrus, O! inspire my breast;
    For Codrus, after Phoebus, sings the best.
    Or, if my wishes have presumed too high,
    And stretched their bounds beyond mortality,
    The praise of artful numbers I resign,
    And hang my pipe upon the sacred pine.

                                THYRSIS.

    Arcadian swains, your youthful poet crown
    With ivy-wreaths; though surly Codrus frown:
    Or, if he blast my Muse with envious praise,
    Then fence my brows with amulets of bays,
    Lest his ill arts, or his malicious tongue,
    Should poison, or bewitch my growing song.

                                CORYDON.

    These branches of a stag, this tusky boar
    (The first essay of arms untried before)
    Young Micon offers, Delia, to thy shrine:
    But, speed his hunting with thy power divine;
    Thy statue then of Parian stone shall stand;
    Thy legs in buskins with a purple band.

                                THYRSIS.

    This bowl of milk, these cakes, (our country fare,)                }
    For thee, Priapus, yearly we prepare,                              }
    Because a little garden is thy care;                               }
    But, if the falling lambs increase my fold,
    Thy marble statue shall be turned to gold.

                                CORYDON.

    Fair Galatea, with thy silver feet,
    O, whiter than the swan, and more than Hybla sweet!
    Tall as a poplar, taper as the bole!
    Come, charm thy shepherd, and restore my soul!
    Come, when my lated sheep at night return,
    And crown the silent hours, and stop the rosy morn!

                                THYRSIS.

    May I become as abject in thy sight,
    As sea-weed on the shore, and black as night;
    Rough as a bur; deformed like him who chaws
    Sardinian herbage to contract his jaws;
    Such and so monstrous let thy swain appear,
    If one day's absence looks not like a year.
    Hence from the field, for shame! the flock deserves
    No better feeding while the shepherd starves.

                                CORYDON.

    Ye mossy springs, inviting easy sleep,
    Ye trees, whose leafy shades those mossy fountains keep,
    Defend my flock! The summer heats are near,
    And blossoms on the swelling vines appear.

                                THYRSIS.

    With heapy fires our cheerful hearth is crowned;
    And firs for torches in the woods abound:
    We fear not more the winds, and wintry cold,
    Than streams the banks, or wolves the bleating fold.

                                CORYDON.

    Our woods, with juniper and chesnuts crowned,
    With falling fruits and berries paint the ground;
    And lavish Nature laughs, and strows her stores around:
    But, if Alexis from our mountains fly,
    Even running rivers leave their channels dry.

                                THYRSIS.

    Parched are the plains, and frying is the field,
    Nor withering vines their juicy vintage yield:
    But, if returning Phyllis bless the plain,
    The grass revives, the woods are green again,
    And Jove descends in showers of kindly rain.

                                CORYDON.

    The poplar is by great Alcides worn;
    The brows of Phoebus his own bays adorn;
    The branching vine the jolly Bacchus loves;
    The Cyprian queen delights in myrtle groves;
    With hazle Phyllis crowns her flowing hair;                        }
    And, while she loves that common wreath to wear,                   }
    Nor bays, nor myrtle boughs, with hazle shall compare.             }

                                THYRSIS.

    The towering ash is fairest in the woods;
    In gardens pines, and poplars by the floods:
    But, if my Lycidas will ease my pains,
    And often visit our forsaken plains,
    To him the towering ash shall yield in woods,
    In gardens pines, and poplars by the floods.

                               MELIBOEUS.

    These rhymes I did to memory commend,
    When vanquished Thyrsis did in vain contend;
    Since when, 'tis Corydon among the swains:
    Young Corydon without a rival reigns.




PASTORAL VIII.[300]

OR,

_PHARMACEUTRIA_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _This Pastoral contains the Songs of Damon and Alphesiboeus.
      The first of them bewails the loss of his mistress, and
      repines at the success of his rival Mopsus. The other
      repeats the charms of some enchantress, who endeavoured, by
      her spells and magic, to make Daphnis in love with her._

    The mournful muse of two despairing swains,
    The love rejected, and the lovers' pains;
    To which the savage lynxes listening stood,
    The rivers stood on heaps, and stopped the running flood;
    The hungry herd the needful food refuse--
    Of two despairing swains, I sing the mournful muse.

    Great Pollio! thou, for whom thy Rome prepares
    The ready triumph of thy finished wars,
    Whether Timavus or the Illyrian coast,
    Whatever land or sea, thy presence boast;
    Is there an hour in fate reserved for me,
    To sing thy deeds in numbers worthy thee?
    In numbers like to thine, could I rehearse
    Thy lofty tragic scenes, thy laboured verse,
    The world another Sophocles in thee,
    Another Homer should behold in me.
    Amidst thy laurels let this ivy twine:
    Thine was my earliest muse; my latest shall be thine.

    Scarce from the world the shades of night withdrew,
    Scarce were the flocks refreshed with morning dew,
    When Damon, stretched beneath an olive shade,
    And, wildly staring upwards, thus inveighed
    Against the conscious gods, and cursed the cruel maid:

    "Star of the morning, why dost thou delay?
    Come, Lucifer, drive on the lagging day,
    While I my Nisa's perjured faith deplore,--
    Witness, ye powers, by whom she falsely swore!
    The gods, alas! are witnesses in vain;
    Yet shall my dying breath to heaven complain.
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strain.

    "The pines of Mænalus, the vocal grove,
    Are ever full of verse, and full of love:
    They hear the hinds, they hear their god complain,
    Who suffered not the reeds to rise in vain
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strain.

    "Mopsus triumphs; he weds the willing fair.
    When such is Nisa's choice, what lover can despair?
    Now griffons join with mares; another age
    Shall see the hound and hind their thirst assuage,
    Promiscuous at the spring. Prepare the lights,
    O Mopsus! and perform the bridal rites.
    Scatter thy nuts among the scrambling boys:
    Thine is the night, and thine the nuptial joys.
    For thee the sun declines: O happy swain!
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strain.

    "O Nisa! justly to thy choice condemned!
    Whom hast thou taken, whom hast thou contemned?
    For him, thou hast refused my browzing herd,
    Scorned my thick eye brows, and my shaggy beard.
    Unhappy Damon sighs and sings in vain,                             }
    While Nisa thinks no god regards a lover's pain.                   }
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strain.                }

    "I viewed thee first, (how fatal was the view!)
    And led thee where the ruddy wildings grew,
    High on the planted hedge, and wet with morning dew.
    Then scarce the bending branches I could win;
    The callow down began to clothe my chin.
    I saw; I perished; yet indulged my pain.
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strain.

    "I know thee, Love! in deserts thou wert bred,
    And at the dugs of savage tigers fed;
    Alien of birth, usurper of the plains!
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strains.

    "Relentless Love the cruel mother led
    The blood of her unhappy babes to shed:
    Love lent the sword; the mother struck the blow;
    Inhuman she; but more inhuman thou:
    Alien of birth, usurper of the plains!
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strains.

    "Old doting Nature, change thy course anew,
    And let the trembling lamb the wolf pursue;
    Let oaks now glitter with Hesperian fruit,
    And purple daffodils from alder shoot;
    Fat amber let the tamarisk distil,
    And hooting owls contend with swans in skill;
    Hoarse Tityrus strive with Orpheus in the woods,
    And challenge famed Arion on the floods.
    Or, oh! let Nature cease, and Chaos reign!
    Begin with me, my flute, the sweet Mænalian strain.

    "Let earth be sea; and let the whelming tide
    The lifeless limbs of luckless Damon hide:
    Farewell, ye secret woods, and shady groves,
    Haunts of my youth, and conscious of my loves!
    From yon high cliff I plunge into the main;                        }
    Take the last present of thy dying swain;                          }
    And cease, my silent flute, the sweet Mænalian strain."            }

    Now take your turns, ye Muses, to rehearse
    His friend's complaints, and mighty magic verse:

    "Bring running water; bind those altars round
    With fillets, and with vervain strow the ground:
    Make fat with frankincense the sacred fires,
    To re-inflame my Daphnis with desires.
    'Tis done: we want but verse.--Restore, my charms,
    My lingering Daphnis to my longing arms.

    "Pale Phoebe, drawn by verse, from heaven descends;
    And Circe changed with charms Ulysses' friends.
    Verse breaks the ground, and penetrates the brake,
    And in the winding cavern splits the snake:
    Verse fires the frozen veins.--Restore, my charms,
    My lingering Daphnis to my longing arms.

    "Around his waxen image first I wind
    Three woollen fillets, of three colours joined;
    Thrice bind about his thrice-devoted head,
    Which round the sacred altar thrice is led.
    Unequal numbers please the gods.--My charms,
    Restore my Daphnis to my longing arms.

    "Knit with three knots the fillets; knit them strait;
    Then say, 'These knots to love I consecrate.'
    Haste, Amaryllis, haste!--Restore, my charms,
    My lovely Daphnis to my longing arms.
    "As fire this figure hardens, made of clay,
    And this of wax with fire consumes away;
    Such let the soul of cruel Daphnis be--
    Hard to the rest of women, soft to me.
    Crumble the sacred mole of salt and corn:
    Next in the fire the bays with brimstone burn;
    And, while it crackles in the sulphur, say,
    'This I for Daphnis burn; thus Daphnis burn away!
    This laurel is his fate.'--Restore, my charms,
    My lovely Daphnis to my longing arms.

    "As when the raging heifer, through the grove,
    Stung with desire, pursues her wandering love;
    Faint at the last, she seeks the weedy pools,
    To quench her thirst, and on the rushes rolls,
    Careless of night, unmindful to return;
    Such fruitless fires perfidious Daphnis burn,
    While I so scorn his love!--Restore, my charms,
    My lingering Daphnis to my longing arms.

    "These garments once were his, and left to me,
    The pledges of his promised loyalty,
    Which underneath my threshold I bestow:
    These pawns, O sacred earth! to me my Daphnis owe.
    As these were his, so mine is he.--My charms,
    Restore their lingering lord to my deluded arms.

    "These poisonous plants, for magic use designed,
    (The noblest and the best of all the baneful kind,)
    Old Moeris brought me from the Politic strand,
    And culled the mischief of a bounteous land.
    Smeared with these powerful juices, on the plain,
    He howls a wolf among the hungry train;
    And oft the mighty necromancer boasts,
    With these, to call from tombs the stalking ghosts,
    And from the roots to tear the standing corn,
    Which, whirled aloft, to distant fields is borne:
    Such is the strength of spells.--Restore, my charms,
    My lingering Daphnis to my longing arms.
    "Bear out these ashes; cast them in the brook;
    Cast backwards o'er your head; nor turn your look:
    Since neither gods nor godlike verse can move,
    Break out, ye smothered fires, and kindle smothered love.
    Exert your utmost power, my lingering charms;
    And force my Daphnis to my longing arms.

    "See while my last endeavours I delay,
    The walking ashes rise, and round our altars play!
    Run to the threshold, Amaryllis,--hark!
    Our Hylax opens, and begins to bark.
    Good heaven! may lovers what they wish believe?
    Or dream their wishes, and those dreams deceive?
    No more! my Daphnis comes! no more, my charms!
    He comes, he runs, he leaps, to my desiring arms."

FOOTNOTES:

[300] This Eighth Pastoral is copied by our author from two Bucolics
of Theocritus. Spenser has followed both Virgil and Theocritus in the
charms which he employs for curing Britomartis of her love. But he had
also our poet's Ceiris in his eye; for there not only the enchantments
are to be found, but also the very name of Britomartis.--DRYDEN.




PASTORAL IX.[301]

OR,

_LYCIDAS AND MOERIS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _When Virgil, by the favour of Augustus, had recovered his
      patrimony near Mantua, and went in hope to take possession,
      he was in danger to be slain by Arius the centurion, to
      whom those lands were assigned by the Emperor, in reward
      of his service against Brutus and Cassius. This Pastoral
      therefore is filled with complaints of his hard usage; and
      the persons introduced are the bailiff of Virgil, Moeris,
      and his friend Lycidas._

                                LYCIDAS.

    Ho, Moeris! whither on thy way so fast?
    This leads to town.

                                MOERIS.

    O Lycidas! at last
    The time is come, I never thought to see,
    (Strange revolution for my farm and me!)
    When the grim captain in a surly tone
    Cries out, "Pack up, ye rascals, and be gone."
    Kicked out, we set the best face on't we could;                    }
    And these two kids, t'appease his angry mood,                      }
    I bear,--of which the Furies give him good!                        }

                                LYCIDAS.

    Your country friends were told another tale,--
    That, from the sloping mountain to the vale,
    And doddered oak, and all the banks along,
    Menalcas saved his fortune with a song.

                                MOERIS.

    Such was the news, indeed; but songs and rhymes
    Prevail as much in these hard iron times,
    As would a plump of trembling fowl, that rise
    Against an eagle sousing from the skies.
    And, had not Phoebus warned me, by the croak
    Of an old raven from a hollow oak,
    To shun debate, Menalcas had been slain,
    And Moeris not survived him, to complain.

                                LYCIDAS.

    Now heaven defend! could barbarous rage induce
    The brutal son of Mars t'insult the sacred Muse?
    Who then should sing the nymphs? or who rehearse
    The waters gliding in a smoother verse?
    Or Amaryllis praise that heavenly lay,
    That shortened, as we went, our tedious way,--
    "O Tityrus, tend my herd, and see them fed;
    To morning pastures, evening waters, led;
    And 'ware the Libyan ridgil's butting head."

                                MOERIS.

    Or what unfinished he to Varus read:--
    "Thy name, O Varus, (if the kinder powers
    Preserve our plains, and shield the Mantuan towers,
    Obnoxious by Cremona's neighbouring crime,)
    The wings of swans, and stronger-pinioned rhyme,
    Shall raise aloft, and soaring bear above--
    The immortal gift of gratitude to Jove."

                                LYCIDAS.

    Sing on, sing on; for I can ne'er be cloyed.
    So may thy swarms the baleful yew avoid;
    So may thy cows their burdened bags distend,
    And trees to goats their willing branches bend.
    Mean as I am, yet have the Muses made
    Me free, a member of the tuneful trade:
    At least the shepherds seem to like my lays;
    But I discern their flattery from their praise:
    I nor to Cinna's ears, nor Varus,' dare aspire,
    But gabble, like a goose, amidst the swan-like choir.

                                MOERIS.

    'Tis what I have been conning in my mind;
    Nor are they verses of a vulgar kind.
    "Come, Galatea! come! the seas forsake!
    What pleasures can the tides with their hoarse murmurs make?
    See, on the shore inhabits purple spring,
    Where nightingales their love-sick ditty sing:
    See, meads with purling streams, with flowers the ground,          }
    The grottoes cool, with shady poplars crowned,                     }
    And creeping vines on arbours weaved around.                       }
    Come then, and leave the waves' tumultuous roar;
    Let the wild surges vainly beat the shore."

                                LYCIDAS.

    Or that sweet song I heard with such delight;
    The same you sung alone one starry night.
    The tune I still retain, but not the words.

                                MOERIS.

    "Why, Daphnis, dost thou search in old records,
    To know the seasons when the stars arise?
    See, Cæsar's lamp is lighted in the skies,--
    The star, whose rays the blushing grapes adorn,
    And swell the kindly ripening ears of corn.
    Under this influence, graft the tender shoot;
    Thy children's children shall enjoy the fruit."
    The rest I have forgot; for cares and time
    Change all things, and untune my soul to rhyme.
    I could have once sung down a summer's sun;
    But now the chime of poetry is done:
    My voice grows hoarse; I feel the notes decay,
    As if the wolves had seen me first to-day.
    But these, and more than I to mind can bring,
    Menalcas has not yet forgot to sing.

                                LYCIDAS.

    Thy faint excuses but inflame me more:
    And now the waves roll silent to the shore;
    Husht winds the topmost branches scarcely bend,
    As if thy tuneful song they did attend:
    Already we have half our way o'ercome;
    Far off I can discern Bianor's tomb.
    Here, where the labourer's hands have formed a bower
    Of wreathing trees, in singing waste an hour.
    Rest here thy weary limbs; thy kids lay down:
    We've day before us yet to reach the town;
    Or if, ere night, the gathering clouds we fear,
    A song will help the beating storm to bear.
    And, that thou may'st not be too late abroad,
    Sing, and I'll ease thy shoulders of thy load.

                                MOERIS.

    Cease to request me;, let us mind our way:
    Another song requires another day.
    When good Menalcas comes, if he rejoice,
    And find a friend at court, I'll find a voice.

FOOTNOTES:

[301] In the Ninth Pastoral, Virgil has made a collection of many
scattering passages, which he had translated from Theocritus; and here
he has bound them into a nosegay.--DRYDEN.




PASTORAL X.

OR,

_GALLUS_.


                               ARGUMENT.

    _Gallus, a great patron of Virgil, and an excellent poet,
      was very deeply in love with one Cytheris, whom he calls
      Lycoris, and who had forsaken him for the company of a
      soldier. The poet therefore supposes his friend Gallus
      retired, in his height of melancholy, into the solitudes
      of Arcadia, (the celebrated scene of pastorals,) where he
      represents him in a very languishing condition, with all
      the rural deities about him, pitying his hard usage, and
      condoling his misfortune._

    Thy sacred succour, Arethusa, bring,
    To crown my labour, ('tis the last I sing,)
    Which proud Lycoris may with pity view:--                          }
    The Muse is mournful, though the numbers few.                      }
    Refuse me not a verse, to grief and Gallus due,                    }
    So may thy silver streams beneath the tide,
    Unmixed with briny seas, securely glide.
    Sing then my Gallus, and his hopeless vows;
    Sing, while my cattle crop the tender browze.
    The vocal grove shall answer to the sound,
    And echo, from the vales, the tuneful voice rebound.
    What lawns or woods with-held you from his aid,                    }
    Ye nymphs, when Gallus was to love betrayed,                       }
    To love, unpitied by the cruel maid?                               }
    Not steepy Pindus could retard your course,
    Nor cleft Parnassus, nor the Aonian source:
    Nothing, that owns the Muses, could suspend
    Your aid to Gallus:--Gallus is their friend.
    For him the lofty laurel stands in tears,
    And hung with humid pearls the lowly shrub appears.
    Mænalian pines the godlike swain bemoan,                           }
    When, spread beneath a rock, he sighed alone;                      }
    And cold Lycæus wept from every dropping stone.                    }
    The sheep surround their shepherd, as he lies:
    Blush not, sweet poet, nor the name despise.
    Along the streams, his flock Adonis fed;
    And yet the queen of beauty blest his bed.
    The swains and tardy neat-herds came, and last
    Menalcas, wet with beating winter mast.
    Wondering, they asked from whence arose thy flame.
    Yet more amazed, thy own Apollo came.
    Flushed were his cheeks, and glowing were his eyes:
    "Is she thy care? is she thy care?" he cries.
    "Thy false Lycoris flies thy love and thee,                        }
    And, for thy rival, tempts the raging sea,                         }
    The forms of horrid war, and heaven's inclemency."                 }
    Silvanus came: his brows a country crown
    Of fennel, and of nodding lilies, drown.
    Great Pan arrived; and we beheld him too,
    His cheeks and temples of vermilion hue.
    "Why, Gallus, this immoderate grief?" he cried,
    "Think'st thou that love with tears is satisfied?
    The meads are sooner drunk with morning dews,
    The bees with flowery shrubs, the goats with browze."
    Unmoved, and with dejected eyes, he mourned:
    He paused, and then these broken words returned:--
    "'Tis past; and pity gives me no relief:
    But you, Arcadian swains, shall sing my grief,
    And on your hills my last complaints renew:
    So sad a song is only worthy you.
    How light would lie the turf upon my breast,
    If you my sufferings in your songs exprest!
    Ah! that your birth and business had been mine--
    To pen the sheep, and press the swelling vine!
    Had Phyllis or Amyntas caused my pain,
    Or any nymph or shepherd on the plain,
    (Though Phyllis brown, though black Amyntas were,
    Are violets not sweet, because not fair?)
    Beneath the sallows and the shady vine,
    My loves had mixed their pliant limbs with mine:
    Phyllis with myrtle wreaths had crowned my hair,
    And soft Amyntas sung away my care.
    Come, see what pleasures in our plains abound;
    The woods, the fountains, and the flowery ground.
    As you are beauteous, were you half so true,
    Here could I live, and love, and die with only you.
    Now I to fighting fields am sent afar,
    And strive in winter camps with toils of war;
    While you, (alas, that I should find it so!)                       }
    To shun my sight, your native soil forego,                         }
    And climb the frozen Alps, and tread the eternal snow.             }
    Ye frosts and snows, her tender body spare!
    Those are not limbs for icicles to tear.
    For me, the wilds and deserts are my choice;
    The Muses, once my care; my once harmonious voice.
    There will I sing, forsaken, and alone:
    The rocks and hollow caves shall echo to my moan.
    The rind of every plant her name shall know;
    And, as the rind extends, the love shall grow.
    Then on Arcadian mountains will I chase
    (Mixed with the woodland nymphs) the savage race;
    Nor cold shall hinder me, with horns and hounds
    To thrid the thickets, or to leap the mounds.
    And now methinks o'er steepy rocks I go,
    And rush through sounding woods, and bend the Parthian bow;
    As if with sports my sufferings I could ease,
    Or by my pains the god of love appease.
    My frenzy changes: I delight no more
    On mountain tops to chase the tusky boar:
    No game but hopeless love my thoughts pursue:
    Once more, ye nymphs, and songs, and sounding woods, adieu!
    Love alters not for us his hard decrees,
    Not though beneath the Thracian clime we freeze,
    Or Italy's indulgent heaven forego,
    And in mid-winter tread Sithonian snow;
    Or, when the barks of elms are scorched, we keep
    On Meroë's burning plains the Libyan sheep.
    In hell, and earth, and seas, and heaven above,
    Love conquers all; and we must yield to Love."

    My Muses, here your sacred raptures end:
    The verse was what I owed my suffering friend.
    This while I sung, my sorrows I deceived,
    And bending osiers into baskets weaved.
    The song, because inspired by you, shall shine;
    And Gallus will approve, because 'tis mine--
    Gallus, for whom my holy flames renew,
    Each hour, and every moment rise in view;
    As alders, in the spring, their boles extend,
    And heave so fiercely, that the bark they rend.

    Now let us rise; for hoarseness oft invades
    The singer's voice, who sings beneath the shades.
    From juniper unwholesome dews distil,                              }
    That blast the sooty corn, the withering herbage kill.             }
    Away, my goats, away! for you have browzed your fill.              }