<P_21>

As soone as his grace was gone, I, reioycing thereat, told Sir Thomas
Moore howe happy he was, whom the king had so familiarly entertayned,
as I neuer had seene him to doe to any $other excepte Cardinall Wolsey,
whom I sawe $his $grace once walke with, arme in arme.  ROPER-E1-P2,21.2

"I thancke our lord, sonne,"quoth he, ROPER-E1-P2,21.3

"I find his grace my very good lord indeed, ROPER-E1-P2,21.4

and I beleeave he dothe as singulerly favour me as any subiecte within
$this realme.  ROPER-E1-P2,21.5

Howbeit, sonne Roper, I may tell thee I haue no cawse to be prowd thereof,
ROPER-E1-P2,21.6

for if my head $could winne him a castle in Fraunce <paren> for than
was there warre betweene vs <$$paren> it should not faile to goe.
"ROPER-E1-P2,21.7

This Sir Thomas Moore, amonge all other his vertues, was of suche meeknes
that if it had fortuned him with any learned men resortinge to him from
Oxford, Cambridge, or els where, as there did divers, some for desire
of his acquaintaunce, some for the famous reporte of his wisdome and
learning, and some for suites of the vniuersityes, to haue entered into
argvment, wherein fewe were comparable vnto him, and so farre to have
<P_22> discoursed with them therein that he might perceiue they coulde
not, without some inconveiens, hold out much further disputacion against
him: Then, least he should discomforte them, as he that sought out not his
owne glory, but rather wold seeme conquered then to discourage studentes
in their studies, euer shewinge himself more desirous to learne then to
teache, wold he by some witty devise courteouslye breake of into some
other matter, and geeve over.  Of whom, for his wisdome and learninge,
had the kinge suche an opinion , that at suche tyme as he attended
vppon his highnes, takinge his progresse either to oxford or Cambridge,
where he was receaved with very eloquent orations, his grace wold alwaies
assigne him, as one that was prompte and ready therein, ex tempore to make
awneswer therevnto.  Whose manner was, whensoeuer he had occasion, either
here or beyond the sea, to be in any vniuersity, not onely to be present
at the readinge and $disputations there comonly vsed, but also learnedly
to dispute amonge them himself.  <P_23> Who, beinge Chauncelour of the
duchie, was made Embassador twice, ioyned in Comission with Cardinall
Wolsey, once to $the Emperour Charels into Flaunders, the other tyme to
the French kinge into Fraunce.  ROPER-E1-P2,22.8

Not longe after this, the water-baily of London, sometyme his servant ,
hearing, where he had bine at dynner, certeine marchantes liberally to
raile against his old maister, waxed so discontented therewith that he
hastely came to him, and told him what he had herd.  ROPER-E1-P2,22.9

"And were I, Sir,"quoth he,"in such favour and aucthoryty with my prince
as {in} you are, such men $surelye should not be Suffred so villainously
and falsly to misreporte and slaunder me.  Wherefore I wold wishe you
to call them before you, and to their shame for their lewd malice to
punishe them. "ROPER-E1-P2,22.10

Who, smilinge vppon him, said:"Why, master Waterbayly, wold you haue me
pvnyshe those by whom I receiue more benefitt then by you all that $be
mye freindes?  ROPER-E1-P2,22.11

Let them a gods name speake as lewdly as they list of me, and shoote
neuer so many arrowes at me, ROPER-E1-P2,22.12

$as long as they do not hitt me, what am I the worse?  ROPER-E1-P2,22.13

But if they should once hitt me, then wold it indeed not a litle
trowble me.  ROPER-E1-P2,22.14

Howbeit I trust, by gods helpe, <P_24> there shall none of them all once
be able to touche me.  ROPER-E1-P2,24.15

I haue more cause, I assure thee, master waterbaily, to pyty them then
to be angry with them. "ROPER-E1-P2,24.16

Such fruitefull communicacion had he oftetimes with his familiar Freindes.
ROPER-E1-P2,24.17

So on a tyme, walking with me alonge the teames side at Chelsey,
in talking of other things he said vnto me:"Nowe wold to our Lord,
sonne Rooper, vppon condicion that three things were well established
in Christendome, I were put in a Sack, and here presently caste into
the Thames. "ROPER-E1-P2,24.18

"What greate things be those, Sir,"quoth I,"that should moue you so to
wishe? "ROPER-E1-P2,24.19

"Wouldest thou knowe what they be, sonne Roper? "quoth he.
"ROPER-E1-P2,24.20

Yea, marry, with good will, sir, if it please you,"quoth I.
ROPER-E1-P2,24.21

"In faith, sonne, they be these,"said he.  ROPER-E1-P2,24.22

"The first is, that where the $moste part of Christen princes be at
mortall warre, they were $all at an vniuersall peace.  The second, that
wheare the Church of Christe is <P_25> $at $this $presente sore afflicted
with many errors and heresees, it were setled in a perfect vniformity
$of religion.  The third, that where the kings matter of his mariage
is nowe come in question, it were to the glory of god and quietnes of
all partes brought to a good conclusion. "Whereby, as I could gather,
he iudged that otherwise it wold be a disturbance to a greate parte
of Christendome.  ROPER-E1-P2,25.23

Thus did it by his doings throughe out the whole course of his life appere
that all his travaile and paynes, without respecte of erthly comodities,
either to himself, or any of his, were onely vppon the seruice of god,
the prince, and the realme, wholy bestowed and imploied; whom I herd
in his later tyme to say that he neuer asked the kinge for himself the
valewe of one penye.  ROPER-E1-P2,25.24

As Sir Thomas Moores cvstome was daily, if he were att home, besides
his private prayers, with his children to say the seuen Psalmes, letany
and suffrages Folowinge; So was his guise nightly, before he went to
bed, with his wife, children, and houshold to goe to his chappel, and
there vppon his knees ordinarily to say certeine psalmes and collectes
with them.  ROPER-E1-P2,25.25

And because he was desirous for godlye purposes sometyme to be solitary,
and sequester himself from worldly company.  A good <P_26> distaunce
from his mansion house builded he a place called the newe buildinge,
wherein there was a Chappell, a library, and a gallery; In which, as his
vse was vppon other dayes to occupy himself in prayer and study together,
So on the Fridaie there vsually contynewed he from morning till evening,
spending his time only in devoute praiers and spirituall exercises.
ROPER-E1-P2,26.26

And to provoke his wife and Children to the desire of hevenly things,
he wold sometymes vse thes wordes vnto them: ROPER-E1-P2,26.27

"It is nowe no maistry for you children to goe to heaven,
ROPER-E1-P2,26.28

for euery body geueth you good councell, ROPER-E1-P2,26.29

euery body geeueth you good example; ROPER-E1-P2,26.30

you see vertue rewarded and vice pvnished.  So that you are caried vppe
to heven euen by the chynnes.  ROPER-E1-P2,26.31

But if you live the tyme that no man will geeue you good councell, nor
no man will geeue you good example, when you shall see vertue punished
and vice rewarded, If you will then stand fast and firmely stick to god,
vppon paine of my life, $thoughe you be but half good, god will allowe
you for whole good. "ROPER-E1-P2,26.32

If his wife or any of his children had bine diseased or troubled, he
wold say vnto them:"We may not looke at our pleasure to goe to heaven
in fetherbeds: ROPER-E1-P2,26.33

it is not the way, ROPER-E1-P2,26.34

for our lord himself went thither <P_27> with greate payne and by
many tribulacions, which was the path wherein he walked thither;
ROPER-E1-P2,27.35

$for the servaunt may not looke to be in better case then his master.
"ROPER-E1-P2,27.36

And as he wold in this sort perswade them to take their trowbles
paciently , So wold he in like sorte teach them to withstand the
divell and his temptaciones valiantly, sayeng:"Whosoeuer will marke the
divell and his temptacions, shall find him therein much like to an Ape.
ROPER-E1-P2,27.37

For, like as an Ape, not well loked vnto, $will $be {TEXT:wilbe} busy and
bold to do shrewd turnes, and contrarywise, being spied, will sodeinely
leape back and adventure no farther; So the divell , finding a man idle,
slouthfull, and without resistaunce redy to receiue his temptacions,
waxeth so hardy that he will not faile still to contynue with him,
vntill to his purpose he $haue throughly brought him.  ROPER-E1-P2,27.38

But on thother side, if he se a man with dilegens perseuer to preuent
and withstand his temptacions, he waxeth so wery that in conclusion he
vtterly forsaketh him.  ROPER-E1-P2,27.39

For as the divell of disposition is a spirite of so highe a pride that
he $can $not {TEXT:cannot} abide to be mocked, so is he of nature so
envious that he feareth any more to assaulte him, least he should therby
not only catche a fowle fall himself, but also minister to the man more
matter of merite. "ROPER-E1-P2,27.40

Thus $delighted he euermore not only in vertuous exercses to be occupied
himself, but also to exhorte his <P_28> wife, children, and houshold
to embrace and followe the same.  To whom, for his notable vertue and
godlines, god shewed, as it seemed, a manifest miraculous token of his
speciall favour towardes him, at such tyme as my wife, as many other that
yeare were, was sick of the sweating sicknes; who, lieing in $so great
extremity of that disease as by no invention or devises that phisitions
in such $cases comonly vse <paren> of whom she had diuers both experte,
wise and wel learned, then continually attendant about her <$$paren>
she could be kepte from sleape, So that both phisitions and all other
there dispaired of her recouerye, and gave her ouer; her father, as he
that most intirely tendred her, being in no small hevines for her, by
praier at gods hand sought to get her remedy.  Whervppon goinge vppe,
after his vsuall maner, into his foresaid newe buildinge, there in his
Chappell, vppon his knees, with teares most devoutly besought allmighty
god that it wold like his goodnes, vnto whom nothinge was impossible,
if it were his blessed will, at <P_29> his mediation to voutchsafe
gratiously to heare his $humble petition.  Where incontynent came into
his mynd that a glister shold be thonly way to helpe her.  Which, when
he told the phisitions, they by and by confessed that, if there were any
hope of health, that was the very best helpe indead, much marvailinge
of themselfes that they had not before remembred it.  ROPER-E1-P2,28.41

Then was it ymmediately ministred vnto her sleapinge, which she could
by no meanes haue bine brought vnto wakinge.  ROPER-E1-P2,28.42

And albeit after $that she was therby throughly awaked, gods markes,
an evident vndoubted token of death, plainely appeared vppon her, yeat
she, contrary to all their expectacions, was, as it was thought, by her
fathers fervent prayer myraculously recouerid, and at length again to
perfect health restored.  Whom, if it had pleased god at that tyme to
haue taken to his mercye, her father said he wold neuer haue medled with
worldly $matters after.  ROPER-E1-P2,28.43

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_71>

And on the morowe after, master Cromewell, meeting me in the parliamente
house, willed me to tell my father that he was put out of the parliament
bill.  ROPER-E1-P2,71.46

But because I had appointed to dine that day in London, I sente the
message $by $my $servaunte to my wife to Chelsey.  Whereof when she
informed her father,"In faith, Megge,"quoth he,"<font> quod differtur
non aufertur.  <$$font> ROPER-E1-P2,71.47

After this, as the duke of Norfolke and Sir Thomas Moore chaunced to
falle in familiar talke together, the duke said vnto him:"By the masse,
master Moore, it is perillous stryvinge withe princes.  ROPER-E1-P2,71.48

And therefore I wold wishe you somewhat to inclyne to the kings pleasure
; ROPER-E1-P2,71.49

For by god body, master Moore, <font> Indignatio principis mors est.
"<$$font> ROPER-E1-P2,71.50

<P_72>

"Is that all, my Lord? "quothe he.  ROPER-E1-P2,72.52

"Then in good faith is there no more differens betweene your grace and
me, but that I shall dye today, and yow tomorowe. "ROPER-E1-P2,72.53

So fell it oute, within a moneth or thereaboutes after the makinge of
the statute for the oathe of the supremacye and matrimonye, that all the
preistes of London and Westminster, and no temporall men but he, were
sente for to appeare att Lambethe before the Byshoppe of Canterbury ,
the lord Chauncelour, and Secretory Cromwell, Comissioners appointed
there to tender the oathe vnto them.  ROPER-E1-P2,72.54

Then Sir Thomas Moore, as his accostomed manner was alwaies, ere he
entered into any matter of importaunce, as when he was firste chosen of
the kings privy Councell, when he was sent Embassadour, appointed speaker
of the parliamente, made Lord Chauncelour, or when he tooke any like
waighty matter vppon him, To goe to church and be confessed, to heare
masse and be howsled, So did he likewise in the mornynge earlye the self
same day that he was summoned to appeare before the Lordes at Lambeth.
ROPER-E1-P2,72.55

And whereas he evermore vsed before, at his departure from his wife and
children, whom he <P_73> tenderly loved, to haue them bring him to his
boate, and there to kisse them all, and bidd them farewell, Then wold he
Suffer none of them forthe of the gate to followe him, ROPER-E1-P2,73.56

but pulled the wickatt after him, ROPER-E1-P2,73.57

and shutt them all from him; ROPER-E1-P2,73.58

and with an heauy harte, as by his countenaunce it appeared, with me
and our foure servantes there tooke he his boate towards Lambithe.
Wherein sitting still sadly a while, at the last he $sodainely rounded
me in the yeare, and said:"Sonne Roper, I thancke our Lord the feild is
wonne. "ROPER-E1-P2,73.59

What he ment thereby I then wist not, ROPER-E1-P2,73.60

yeat loth to seeme ignorant, I awneswered:"Sir, I am thereof very
glad. "ROPER-E1-P2,73.61

But as I coniectured afterwardes, it was for $that the loue he had to
god wrought in him so effectually that it conquered all his carnall
affections vtterlye.  ROPER-E1-P2,73.62

$Nowe At his cominge to Lambithe, howe wisely he behaved himself before
the Comissioners, at the ministration of the oathe vnto him, may be found
in certaine letters of his, sent to my wife, remayning in a greate booke
of his workes.  Where, by the space of foure daies , he was betaken to the
custody of the Abbott of Westminster, <P_74> during which tyme the king
consulted with his councell what order were meete to be taken with him.
ROPER-E1-P2,74.63

And albeit in the beginninge they were resolued that with an othe not
to be acknowen whether he had to the supremacye bine sworne, or what
he thoughte thereof, he should be dischardged, yeat did Queene Anne,
by her impourtunate clamour, so sore exasperate the kinge againste him,
that contrary to his former resolucion, he caused the said othe of the
Supremacye to be ministred unto him.  Who, albeit he made a discreete
qualified awnswer, neuertheles was forthwith comitted to the tower.
$Whom, as he was going thitherward, wearing, as he comonly did, a chayne
of gould about his necke, Sir Richard Cromewell, that had the charge of
his conveyans thither, advised him to send home his chayne to his wife,
or to some of his children.  ROPER-E1-P2,74.64

"Nay, Sir,"quoth he,"that I will not; ROPER-E1-P2,74.65

for if I were taken in the feild by my enemies, I wold they shold somewhat
fare the better by me. "<P_75> At whose landing master Leiuetenant $at
the tower gate was ready to receaue him, wheare the Porter demaunded of
him his vpper garment.  ROPER-E1-P2,75.66

"Master Porter,"quoth he,"here it is;"ROPER-E1-P2,75.67

and tooke of his cappe, ROPER-E1-P2,75.68

and deliuerid it $him, saying,"I am very sory it is no better for
you. "ROPER-E1-P2,75.69

"No, Sir,"quoth the Porter,"I must haue your gowne. " ROPER-E1-P2,75.70

And so was he by master Leiuetenaunte convayed to his lodginge,
where he called vnto him one John A wood, his owne servaunte, there
apointed to attend vppon him $who $coulde $neither $write $nor $rede;
ROPER-E1-P2,75.71

and sware him before the Leiuetenaunte that if he should heare or see
him , att any tyme, speake or write any manner of thinge against the
king, the Councell, or the State of the realme, he shoulde open it to
the Leiuetenaunte, that $the $Leiuetenaunte mighte incontinent reveale
it to the Councell.  ROPER-E1-P2,75.72

Nowe when $he had remayned in the Tower a litle more then a monethe,
my wife, longinge to see her father, by her ernest suite at length got
leaue to goe to him.  At whose cominge, after the seuen psalmes and
<P_76> letany said <paren> which, whensoeuer she came to him, ere he
fell in talke of any worldly matters, he vsed accustomably to say with
her <$$paren> Amonge other communicacion he said vnto her: "I beleeve,
Megge, that they that have putt me heare, weene they haue done me a
high displeasure.  ROPER-E1-P2,76.73

But I assure $thee, on my faithe, my owne good daughter, if it had not
byne for my wife and you that be my children, whom I accompte the cheife
parte of my charge, I wold not haue fayled longe ere this to haue closed
my self in as straighte a roome, and straighter too.  ROPER-E1-P2,76.74

But since I am come hither without myne owne deserte, I trust that god
of his goodnes will discharge me of my care, and with his graciouse
helpe supply my lack amonge you.  ROPER-E1-P2,76.75

I find no cause, I thanck god, Megge, to reckon my self in wors case
heare then in my owne house.  ROPER-E1-P2,76.76

For me thinckethe god makethe me a wanton, and settethe me on his lappe
and dandlethe me. "ROPER-E1-P2,76.77

Thus by his gratious demeanour in tribulacion appeared it that all the
$trowbles that euer chaunced $vnto him, by his patient sufferaunce
thereof, were to him no paynefull punishmentes, but of his paciens
profitable exercises.  ROPER-E1-P2,76.78

And att another tyme, when he had first questioned <P_77> with my wife
a while of the order of his wife, children, and state of his howse in
his absens, he asked her how queene Anne did.  ROPER-E1-P2,77.79

"In faith, father,"quoth she,"never better. "ROPER-E1-P2,77.80

"Never better!  Megge,"quothe he.  ROPER-E1-P2,77.81

"Alas!  Megge, alas!  it pitieth me to remember $into what misery,
poore soule, she shall shortly come. "ROPER-E1-P2,77.82

After this, master Lieutenant, cominge into his chamber to visite him,
rehearced the benefittes and freindshipp that he had many waies receaved
at his handes, and howe much bounden he was therefore freindly to
intertayne him, and make him good cheare; which, since the case standing
as it did, he could not do without the kinges indignation, he trusted,
he said, he wold accepte his good will, and suche poore cheare as he had.
ROPER-E1-P2,77.83

"Maister Leivetenaunt,"quothe he againe,"I veryly beleeve, as you may,
so you are my good freind indeede, and wold, as you say, with your
best cheare intertaine me, for the which I most hartely thancke you;
ROPER-E1-P2,77.84

and assure your self, master Leivetenant, I doe not myslike my cheare ;
ROPER-E1-P2,77.85

But whensoeuer I soe doe, then thruste me out of your doores.
"ROPER-E1-P2,77.86

Whereas the oath confirminge the supremacye and <P_78> matrimonie was
by the first statute in fewe wordes comprised, The Lord Chauncelor
and Master Secretary did of their owne heads adde more words vnto it,
to make it appeare vnto the kinges eares more pleasaunt and plausible.
ROPER-E1-P2,78.87

And that oath, so amplified, caused they to be ministred to Sir Thomas
Moore, and to all other throughout the Realme.  Which Sir Thomas Moore
perceyuinge, said vnto my wife:"I may tell thee, Megg, they that haue
committed me hither, for refusinge of $this oath not agreable with the
statute, are not by theyr owne lawe able to iustifye my imprisonement.
ROPER-E1-P2,78.88

And surely, daughter, it is greate pitye that any Christian prince
should by a flexible Councell ready to followe his affections, and by
a weake Cleargie lackinge grace constantly to stand to their learninge,
with Flatterye be so shamefully abused. "ROPER-E1-P2,78.89

But at length the Lord Chauncelour and master Secretorye, espieng their
$owne ouersight in that behalf, were fayne afterwardes to find the meanes
that another statute shold be made for the confirmacion of the oath so
amplified with their additions.  ROPER-E1-P2,78.90

<P_79>

After Sir Thomas Moore had geeuen over his office and all other worldly
doings therewith, to thentent he might from thenceforthe the more quietly
$settle himself to the Service of god, Then made he a conveyaunce for the
disposition of all his lands, reseruinge to himself an estate thereof
only for tearme of his owne life; and after his decease assuringe some
parte of the same to his wife, some to his sonnes wife for a Joynture
in consideracion that she was an inheretrice in possession of more then
an houndred poundes land by the yeare, and some to me and my wife in
recompence of our mariage money, with divers remaynders ouer; All which
conveyaunce and assurance was parfitelye finished longe before that
matter wheruppon he was attainted was made an offence, and yeat after
by statute clearely avoided.  ROPER-E1-P2,79.92

And so were all his landes, that he had to his wife and children by the
said conveyaunce in such sorte assured, contrary to thorder of lawe,
taken away from them, and brought into the kings handes, saving that
portion $which he had apointed to my wife and me; $which, $although $he
$had $in $the $foresaid $conveyaunce $reserued, $as $he $did $the $reste,
$for $tearme $of $life $to $him $self, $neuer $the $lesse , $vpon $further
$consideracion, $two $dayes $after, $by $another $conveyaunce, $he $gaue
$the $same $immediatlye $to <P_80> $my $wife $and $me in possession.
ROPER-E1-P2,80.93

And so because the statute had vndone onely the firste conveyaunce,
geeving no more to the kinge but so much as passed by that, The seconde
conveyaunce, whereby it was geeven to my Wife and me, being dated two
dayes after, was without the compasse of the statute, ROPER-E1-P2,80.94

And so was our porcion to vs by that meanes clearely reserved.
ROPER-E1-P2,80.95

As Sir Thomas Moore in the Tower chaunced on a tyme, lookinge out of his
windowe, to behold one master Reynolds, a religious, learned, and vertuous
father of Sion, and three Monkes of the Charterhouse, for the Matters of
the Matrimonye and Supremacye goinge out of the Tower to execution, He,
as one longinge in that iourneye to haue accompanied them, said vnto my
wife, then standinge there besides him: "Loe, doest thow not see, Megge,
that thes blessed fathers be nowe as chearefully goinge to their deathes
as bridegromes {COM:go} to their Mariage?  Wherefore thereby maiste thow
see, myne owne good daughter , what a greate difference there is betweene
such as haue in effecte spent all their dayes <P_81> in a straight, hard,
penetentiall, and paynefull life religiously, and such as haue in the
world, like worldly wretches, as thy poore father $hath done, consumed
all theyr tyme in pleasure and ease licentiouslye.  ROPER-E1-P2,81.96

For god, consideringe their longe continued life in most sore and greavous
penaunce, will no longer suffer them to remayne heare in this vale of
Misery and iniquitye, ROPER-E1-P2,81.97

but speadily hence taketh them to the fruition of his euerlasting deitye;
whereas thy syllye father, Megge, that like a most wicked Caytiffe hath
passed forth the whole course of his miserable life most sinfully, God,
thinckinge him not worthy so soone to come to that eternall felicitye,
leaveth him heare yet still in $the world, further to be plonged and
turmoyled withe miserye. "ROPER-E1-P2,81.98

Within a while after, master Secretorye, cominge to him $into the tower
from the kinge, pretended much freindshipp towardes him, ROPER-E1-P2,81.99

and for his comforte told him that the kings highnes was his good and
gratious Lorde, and $minded not $with any matter wherein he should
haue any cause of scruple, from henceforthe to trouble his consciens.
ROPER-E1-P2,81.100

As soone as master Secretory was gone, to expresse what comforte he
conceaved of his wordes, he wrote with a cole, for Incke then had he none,
thease verses folowinge: {COM:verses_omitted} ROPER-E1-P2,81.101

{COM:insert_helsinki_sample_here}

<P_95>

Wherevppon the Lord Chauncelour said to the rest of the Lordes:"Loe,
my Lordes, loe, you heare what <P_96> my lord cheif Iustice saith,
"ROPER-E1-P2,96.104

and so ymmediately gave he Iudgemente against him.  After whiche ended
, the Comissioners yeat further curteouslye offred him, if he had any
thinge els to alleage for his defence, to graunt him favorable audience.
Who awneswered:"More haue I not to say, my Lordes, but that like as
the blessed Apostle St Pawle, as we read in thactes of the Apostles,
was present, and consented to the death of St Stephen, and kepte their
clothes that stoned him to deathe, and yeat be they $nowe both twayne
holy Sainctes in heaven, and shall continue there frendes for euer, So I
verily $truste, and shall therefore right hartelye pray, that thoughe your
lordshippes haue nowe $here in earthe bine Judges to my condemnacion,
we may yeat hereafter in heaven meerily all meete together , to our
euerlasting saluacion. "ROPER-E1-P2,96.105

Thus much towching Sir Thomas Moores arrainement, being not thereat
present my self, haue I by the credyble reporte, $partely of the right
worshippfull Sir Anthony Seintleger, knight, and partely of Richard
Heywood and John Webbe, gentlemen, withe others of good creditt, <P_97>
at the hearing thereof present themselves, as farre as my poore witt and
memory wold serue me, here truly rehersed vnto you.  ROPER-E1-P2,97.106

Nowe, after this arraignement, departed he from the barre to the Tower
againe, ledde by Sir William Kingston, a talle, stronge, and comely
knighte, Constable of the Tower, and his very deare freind.  Who, when
he had brought him from westminster to the old Swanne towards the Tower,
there with an heavy harte, the teares runinge downe by his cheekes,
bade him farewell.  ROPER-E1-P2,97.107

Sir Thomas Moore, seinge him so sorowefull, comforted him with as good
words as {with} he could, sayenge:"Good master Kingston, trouble not
your self, ROPER-E1-P2,97.108

but be of good cheare; ROPER-E1-P2,97.109

for I will pray for you, and my good Lady, your wife, that we may meete
in heuen together, where we $shall $be {TEXT:shalbe} meery for ever and
ever. "ROPER-E1-P2,97.110

Soone after, Sir William Kingston, talking with me of Sir Thomas Moore
, saide:"In good faith, master Roper, I was ashamed of my self, that,
at my departing from your father, I found my harte so feeble, and his
so stronge, that he was fayne to comforte me, which should rather have
comforted him. "ROPER-E1-P2,97.111

When Sir Thomas Moore came from westminster to the Towerward againe, his
daughter, my wife, desirous <P_98> to see her father, whom she thought
she should neuer see in this world after, and also to haue his Finall
blessinge, gaue attendaunce aboute the Tower wharf, where she knewe he
should passe by, before he could enter into the Tower, There tarienge
for his coming home.  ROPER-E1-P2,98.112

Assone as she sawe him, after his blessing on her knees reuerently
receaued, Shee hastinge towards him, and, without consideracion or
care of her self, pressinge $in amonge $the $middest $of the thronge and
company of the garde that with halberdes and bills wente round aboute him,
hastely ranne to him, ROPER-E1-P2,98.113

and there openly, in the sight of them all, imbraced him,
ROPER-E1-P2,98.114

toke him about the neck, ROPER-E1-P2,98.115

and kissed him.  Who, well liking her moste naturall and deere daughterlye
affection towardes him, gaue her his fatherly blessinge and many $godly
wordes of comforte besides.  From whom after she was departed, she, not
satisfied with the former sighte of $him, $and $like $one $that $had
$forgotten $herselfe, $being $all $ravished $with $the $entyre $loue
$of her deere father, having respecte neyther to her self, nor to the
presse of $the people and multitude <P_99> that were $there aboute him,
sodainely torned back againe, ROPER-E1-P2,99.116

ranne to him as before, ROPER-E1-P2,99.117

tooke him about the neck, ROPER-E1-P2,99.118

and divers tymes together most lovingly kissed him; ROPER-E1-P2,99.119

and at last, with a full heavy harte, was fayne to departe from him:
The beholding whereof was to many of them that were present thereat so
lamentable that it made them for very sorowe $therof to mourne and weape.
ROPER-E1-P2,99.120

So remayned Sir Thomas Moore in the tower more then a seuennight after
his iudgment; From whence, the day before he suffred, he sent his
shirte of heare <paren> not willinge to haue it seene <$$paren> to my
wife, his deerely beloved daughter, and a letter written with a coale,
contayned in the foresaid booke of his workes, plainely expressing the
fervent desire he had to suffer $on the morowe, in these words folowinge
: ROPER-E1-P2,99.121

"I comber you, good Margaret, much, ROPER-E1-P2,99.122

but I wold be sory if it should be any longer then to morowe;
ROPER-E1-P2,99.123

For to morowe is St Thomas even, and the vtas of St Peeter;
ROPER-E1-P2,99.124

And therefore too morowe longe I to goe to god; ROPER-E1-P2,99.125

it were a daye very meete and convenient for me, etc.
ROPER-E1-P2,99.126

I neuer liked your manner $towardes $me better then when you kissed
me last.  ROPER-E1-P2,99.127

For I like when daughterly <P_100> loue and deere charitye hath no
leysure to looke to worldly curtesye. "ROPER-E1-P2,100.128

And so vppon the next morowe, beinge Tuesdaye, St Thomas even, and
the vtas of Saincte Peeter, in the yeare of our lord, one thowsand five
hundreth thirtye and five <paren> according as he in his letter $the $daye
before had wished <$$paren> earlye in the morninge came to him Sir Thomas
Pope, his singuler freind, on message from the kinge and his Councell,
That he should before nyne of the clock the same morning suffer death
; and that therefore furthwith he should prepare him self therunto:
"ROPER-E1-P2,100.129

Master Pope,"quoth he,"for your good tydings I most hartelye thancke you.
ROPER-E1-P2,100.130

I haue bine alwaies much bounden to the Kings highnes for the benefites
and honoures that he hath still from tyme to tyme most bountyfully heaped
vppon me; ROPER-E1-P2,100.131

and yeat more bound am I to his grace for puttinge me into this place,
where I haue had convenient time and space to haue remembraunce of my end.
ROPER-E1-P2,100.132

And so helpe me, god, most of all, master Pope, am I bound to his highnes
that it pleaseath him so shortly to ridde me out of the miseries of this
wretched woorld.  ROPER-E1-P2,100.133

And therefore will I not faile ernestly <P_101> to pray for his grace,
bothe heare and also in another world. "ROPER-E1-P2,101.134

"The kings pleasure is further,"quoth master Pope,"that at your execution
you shall not vse many words. "ROPER-E1-P2,101.135

"Master Pope,"quothe he,"you do well to geeue me warninge of his graces
pleasure, ROPER-E1-P2,101.136

for other wise I had purposed at that tyme somewhat to have spoken,
but of no matter wherewith his grace, or any other, should haue had
cause to be offended.  ROPER-E1-P2,101.137

Neuertheles, whatsoeuer I intended, I am ready obediently to conforme
my self to his graces commandementes.  ROPER-E1-P2,101.138

And I beseeke you, good master Pope, to be a meene vnto his highnes that
my daughter Margaret may be at my buriall. "ROPER-E1-P2,101.139

"The kinge is content already,"quoth master Pope,"that your wife ,
children and other $your freinds shall haue libertie to be present
thereat. "ROPER-E1-P2,101.140

"O howe much beholden then,"said Sir Thomas Moore,"am I to his
grace, that vnto my poore buriall vouchsafeth to haue so graciouse
consideracion. "ROPER-E1-P2,101.141

Wherewithall master Pope, takinge his leaue of hym, could not refrayne
from wepinge.  Which Sir Thomas Moore perceiuinge, comforted him in this
wise: ROPER-E1-P2,101.142

"Quiet your self, good master Pope, ROPER-E1-P2,101.143

and be not discomforted; ROPER-E1-P2,101.144

For I trust that we shall, once in heaven, <P_102> see eche other full
merily, where we $shall $be {TEXT:shalbe} sure to live and loue together,
in ioyful blisse eternally. "Vppon whose departure, Sir Thomas Moore,
as one that had bine invited to $some solempne feaste, chaunged himself
into his best apparell; which master Leiuetenaunt espienge, advised
him to put it of, sayenge that he that should haue it was but a Javill.
ROPER-E1-P2,102.145

"What, master Leiuetenaunt,"quoth he,"shall I accompte him a Javill that
shall doe me this day so singuler a benefitt?  ROPER-E1-P2,102.146

Nay, I assure you, were it clothe of gold, I wolde accompt it well
bestowed on him, as St Ciprian did, who gaue his executioner thirtie
peeces of gould. "ROPER-E1-P2,102.147

And albeit at length, throughe master Leiuetenauntes importunate
persuasion, he altered his apparell, yeat after thexample of that holy
martir St Ciprian, did he, of that litle money that was lefte him,
send one Angell of gold to his executioner.  ROPER-E1-P2,102.148

And so was he by master Leiuetenaunte brought out of the Tower, and
from thence led $towardes the place of execution.  Where, goinge vppe
the scaffold, which <P_103> was so weake that it was ready to fall, he
saide merilye to master Leiuetenaunte:"I pray you, master Leiuetenaunte,
see me salf vppe, ROPER-E1-P2,103.149

and for my cominge downe let me shifte for my self. " ROPER-E1-P2,103.150

Then desired he all the people thereaboute to pray for him, and to
beare witnes with him that he should $nowe $there suffer death in and
for the faith of the holy chatholik churche.  Whiche done, he kneled
downe, and after his prayers said, turned to thexecutioner, and with
a cheerefull countenaunce spake $thus to him:"Plucke vpp thy spirites,
man, ROPER-E1-P2,103.151

and be not afrayde to do thine office; ROPER-E1-P2,103.152

my necke is very shorte; ROPER-E1-P2,103.153

take heede therefore thow strike not awrye, for savinge of thine
honestye. "ROPER-E1-P2,103.154

So passed Sir Thomas Moore out of this world to god, vppon the very
same daye in which himself had most desired.  Soone after whose deathe
came intelligence thereof to the Emperour Chareles.  Whervppon he sent
for Sir Thomas Elliott, our english Embassadour, and said vnto him:
"My Lord Embassador, we vnderstand that the Kinge, your master, hath put
his faithfull seruaunt and grave, wise Councelour, Sir Thomas Moore ,
to deathe. "Wherunto Sir Thomas Elliott awneswered that he <P_104>
vnderstood nothing thereof.  ROPER-E1-P2,104.155

"Well,"said the Emperour,"it is too true.  ROPER-E1-P2,104.156

And this will we say, that if we had bine maister of such a servante, of
whose doings our selfe haue had these many yeares no small experience,
we wold rather haue lost the best city of our dominions then haue lost
such a worthy councellour. "Which matter was by the same Sir Thomas
Eliott to my self, to my wife, to maister Clement and his wife, to
master John Haywood and his wife, and $vnto diuers other his Freinds
accordingly reported.  ROPER-E1-P2,104.157

Finis.  ROPER-E1-P2,104.158

Deo gratias.  ROPER-E1-P2,104.159
