

IN THE SEVEN WOODS.


  I have heard the pigeons of the Seven Woods
  Make their faint thunder, and the garden bees
  Hum in the lime tree flowers; and put away
  The unavailing outcries and the old bitterness
  That empty the heart. I have forgot awhile
  Tara uprooted, and new commonness
  Upon the throne and crying about the streets
  And hanging its paper flowers from post to post,
  Because it is alone of all things happy.
  I am contented for I know that Quiet
  Wanders laughing and eating her wild heart
  Among pigeons and bees, while that Great Archer,
  Who but awaits His hour to shoot, still hangs
  A cloudy quiver over Parc-na-Lee.

    August, 1902.




THE OLD AGE OF QUEEN MAEVE.


  Maeve the great queen was pacing to and fro,
  Between the walls covered with beaten bronze,
  In her high house at Cruachan; the long hearth,
  Flickering with ash and hazel, but half showed
  Where the tired horse-boys lay upon the rushes,
  Or on the benches underneath the walls,
  In comfortable sleep; all living slept
  But that great queen, who more than half the night
  Had paced from door to fire and fire to door.
  Though now in her old age, in her young age
  She had been beautiful in that old way
  That's all but gone; for the proud heart is gone
  And the fool heart of the counting-house fears all
  But soft beauty and indolent desire.
  She could have called over the rim of the world
  Whatever woman's lover had hit her fancy,
  And yet had been great bodied and great limbed,
  Fashioned to be the mother of strong children;
  And she'd had lucky eyes and a high heart,
  And wisdom that caught fire like the dried flax,
  At need, and made her beautiful and fierce,
  Sudden and laughing.
                        O unquiet heart,
  Why do you praise another, praising her,
  As if there were no tale but your own tale
  Worth knitting to a measure of sweet sound?
  Have I not bid you tell of that great queen
  Who has been buried some two thousand years?

  When night was at its deepest, a wild goose
  Cried from the porter's lodge, and with long clamour
  Shook the ale horns and shields upon their hooks;
  But the horse-boys slept on, as though some power
  Had filled the house with Druid heaviness;
  And wondering who of the many changing Sidhe
  Had come as in the old times to counsel her,
  Maeve walked, yet with slow footfall being old,
  To that small chamber by the outer gate.
  The porter slept although he sat upright
  With still and stony limbs and open eyes.
  Maeve waited, and when that ear-piercing noise
  Broke from his parted lips and broke again,
  She laid a hand on either of his shoulders,
  And shook him wide awake, and bid him say
  Who of the wandering many-changing ones
  Had troubled his sleep. But all he had to say
  Was that, the air being heavy and the dogs
  More still than they had been for a good month,
  He had fallen asleep, and, though he had dreamed nothing,
  He could remember when he had had fine dreams.
  It was before the time of the great war
  Over the White-Horned Bull, and the Brown Bull.

  She turned away; he turned again to sleep
  That no god troubled now, and, wondering
  What matters were afoot among the Sidhe,
  Maeve walked through that great hall, and with a sigh
  Lifted the curtain of her sleeping room,
  Remembering that she too had seemed divine
  To many thousand eyes, and to her own
  One that the generations had long waited
  That work too difficult for mortal hands
  Might be accomplished. Bunching the curtain up
  She saw her husband Ailell sleeping there,
  And thought of days when he'd had a straight body,
  And of that famous Fergus, Nessa's husband,
  Who had been the lover of her middle life.

  Suddenly Ailell spoke out of his sleep,
  And not with his own voice or a man's voice,
  But with the burning, live, unshaken voice
  Of those that it may be can never age.
  He said, 'High Queen of Cruachan and Mag Ai
  A king of the Great Plain would speak with you.'
  And with glad voice Maeve answered him, 'What King
  Of the far wandering shadows has come to me?
  As in the old days when they would come and go
  About my threshold to counsel and to help.'
  The parted lips replied, 'I seek your help,
  For I am Aengus and I am crossed in love.'

  'How may a mortal whose life gutters out
  Help them that wander with hand clasping hand
  By rivers where nor rain nor hail has dimmed
  Their haughty images, that cannot fade
  Although their beauty's like a hollow dream.'

  'I come from the undimmed rivers to bid you call
  The children of the Maines out of sleep,
  And set them digging into Anbual's hill.
  We shadows, while they uproot his earthy house,
  Will overthrow his shadows and carry off
  Caer, his blue eyed daughter that I love.
  I helped your fathers when they built these walls
  And I would have your help in my great need,
  Queen of high Cruachan.'
                            'I obey your will
  With speedy feet and a most thankful heart:
  For you have been, O Aengus of the birds,
  Our giver of good counsel and good luck.'
  And with a groan, as if the mortal breath
  Could but awaken sadly upon lips
  That happier breath had moved, her husband turned
  Face downward, tossing in a troubled sleep;
  But Maeve, and not with a slow feeble foot,
  Came to the threshold of the painted house,
  Where her grandchildren slept, and cried aloud,
  Until the pillared dark began to stir
  With shouting and the clang of unhooked arms.

  She told them of the many-changing ones;
  And all that night, and all through the next day
  To middle night, they dug into the hill.
  At middle night great cats with silver claws,
  Bodies of shadow and blind eyes like pearls,
  Came up out of the hole, and red-eared hounds
  With long white bodies came out of the air
  Suddenly, and ran at them and harried them.

  The Maines' children dropped their spades, and stood
  With quaking joints and terror strucken faces,
  Till Maeve called out, 'These are but common men.
  The Maines' children have not dropped their spades
  Because Earth crazy for its broken power
  Casts up a show and the winds answer it
  With holy shadows.' Her high heart was glad,
  And when the uproar ran along the grass
  She followed with light footfall in the midst,
  Till it died out where an old thorn tree stood.

  Friend of these many years, you too had stood
  With equal courage in that whirling rout;
  For you, although you've not her wandering heart,
  Have all that greatness, and not hers alone.
  For there is no high story about queens
  In any ancient book but tells of you,
  And when I've heard how they grew old and died
  Or fell into unhappiness I've said;
  'She will grow old and die and she has wept!'
  And when I'd write it out anew, the words,
  Half crazy with the thought, She too has wept!
  Outrun the measure.
                        I'd tell of that great queen
  Who stood amid a silence by the thorn
  Until two lovers came out of the air
  With bodies made out of soft fire. The one
  About whose face birds wagged their fiery wings
  Said, 'Aengus and his sweetheart give their thanks
  To Maeve and to Maeve's household, owing all
  In owing them the bride-bed that gives peace.'
  Then Maeve, 'O Aengus, Master of all lovers,
  A thousand years ago you held high talk
  With the first kings of many pillared Cruachan.
  O when will you grow weary.'
                                They had vanished,
  But out of the dark air over her head there came
  A murmur of soft words and meeting lips.




BAILE AND AILLINN.


  Argument. Baile and Aillinn were lovers, but
  Aengus, the Master of Love, wishing them to be
  happy in his own land among the dead, told to
  each a story of the other's death, so that their
  hearts were broken and they died.
  I hardly hear the curlew cry,
  Nor the grey rush when wind is high,
  Before my thoughts begin to run
  On the heir of Ulad, Buan's son,
  Baile who had the honey mouth,
  And that mild woman of the south,
  Aillinn, who was King Lugaid's heir.
  Their love was never drowned in care
  Of this or that thing, nor grew cold
  Because their bodies had grown old;
  Being forbid to marry on earth
  They blossomed to immortal mirth.

  About the time when Christ was born,
  When the long wars for the White Horn
  And the Brown Bull had not yet come,
  Young Baile Honey-Mouth, whom some
  Called rather Baile Little-Land,
  Rode out of Emain with a band
  Of harpers and young men, and they
  Imagined, as they struck the way
  To many pastured Muirthemne,
  That all things fell out happily
  And there, for all that fools had said,
  Baile and Aillinn would be wed.

  They found an old man running there,
  He had ragged long grass-yellow hair;
  He had knees that stuck out of his hose;
  He had puddle water in his shoes;
  He had half a cloak to keep him dry;
  Although he had a squirrel's eye.

  O wandering birds and rushy beds
  You put such folly in our heads
  With all this crying in the wind
  No common love is to our mind,
  And our poor Kate or Nan is less
  Than any whose unhappiness
  Awoke the harp strings long ago.
  Yet they that know all things but know
  That all life had to give us is
  A child's laughter, a woman's kiss.

  Who was it put so great a scorn
  In the grey reeds that night and morn
  Are trodden and broken by the herds,
  And in the light bodies of birds
  That north wind tumbles to and fro
  And pinches among hail and snow?

  That runner said, 'I am from the south;
  I run to Baile Honey-Mouth
  To tell him how the girl Aillinn
  Rode from the country of her kin
  And old and young men rode with her:
  For all that country had been astir
  If anybody half as fair
  Had chosen a husband anywhere
  But where it could see her every day.
  When they had ridden a little way
  An old man caught the horse's head
  With "You must home again and wed
  With somebody in your own land."
  A young man cried and kissed her hand
  "O lady, wed with one of us;"
  And when no face grew piteous
  For any gentle thing she spake
  She fell and died of the heart-break.'

  Because a lover's heart's worn out
  Being tumbled and blown about
  By its own blind imagining,
  And will believe that anything
  That is bad enough to be true, is true,
  Baile's heart was broken in two;
  And he being laid upon green boughs
  Was carried to the goodly house
  Where the Hound of Ulad sat before
  The brazen pillars of his door;
  His face bowed low to weep the end
  Of the harper's daughter and her friend;
  For although years had passed away
  He always wept them on that day,
  For on that day they had been betrayed;
  And now that Honey-Mouth is laid
  Under a cairn of sleepy stone
  Before his eyes, he has tears for none,
  Although he is carrying stone, but two
  For whom the cairn's but heaped anew.

  We hold because our memory is
  So full of that thing and of this
  That out of sight is out of mind.
  But the grey rush under the wind
  And the grey bird with crooked bill
  Have such long memories that they still
  Remember Deirdre and her man,
  And when we walk with Kate or Nan
  About the windy water side
  Our heart can hear the voices chide.
  How could we be so soon content
  Who know the way that Naoise went?
  And they have news of Deirdre's eyes
  Who being lovely was so wise,
  Ah wise, my heart knows well how wise.

  Now had that old gaunt crafty one,
  Gathering his cloak about him, run
  Where Aillinn rode with waiting maids
  Who amid leafy lights and shades
  Dreamed of the hands that would unlace
  Their bodices in some dim place
  When they had come to the marriage bed;
  And harpers pondering with bowed head
  A music that had thought enough
  Of the ebb of all things to make love
  Grow gentle without sorrowings;
  And leather-coated men with slings
  Who peered about on every side;
  And amid leafy light he cried,
  'He is well out of wind and wave,
  They have heaped the stones above his grave
  In Muirthemne and over it
  In changeless Ogham letters writ
  Baile that was of Rury's seed.
  But the gods long ago decreed
  No waiting maid should ever spread
  Baile and Aillinn's marriage bed,
  For they should clip and clip again
  Where wild bees hive on the Great Plain.
  Therefore it is but little news
  That put this hurry in my shoes.'
  And hurrying to the south he came
  To that high hill the herdsmen name
  The Hill Seat of Leighin, because
  Some god or king had made the laws
  That held the land together there,
  In old times among the clouds of the air.

  That old man climbed; the day grew dim;
  Two swans came flying up to him
  Linked by a gold chain each to each
  And with low murmuring laughing speech
  Alighted on the windy grass.
  They knew him: his changed body was
  Tall, proud and ruddy, and light wings
  Were hovering over the harp strings
  That Etain, Midhir's wife, had wove
  In the hid place, being crazed by love.

  What shall I call them? fish that swim
  Scale rubbing scale where light is dim
  By a broad water-lily leaf;
  Or mice in the one wheaten sheaf
  Forgotten at the threshing place;
  Or birds lost in the one clear space
  Of morning light in a dim sky;
  Or it may be, the eyelids of one eye
  Or the door pillars of one house,
  Or two sweet blossoming apple boughs
  That have one shadow on the ground;
  Or the two strings that made one sound
  Where that wise harper's finger ran;
  For this young girl and this young man
  Have happiness without an end
  Because they have made so good a friend.

  They know all wonders, for they pass
  The towery gates of Gorias
  And Findrias and Falias
  And long-forgotten Murias,
  Among the giant kings whose hoard
  Cauldron and spear and stone and sword
  Was robbed before Earth gave the wheat;
  Wandering from broken street to street
  They come where some huge watcher is
  And tremble with their love and kiss.
  They know undying things, for they
  Wander where earth withers away,
  Though nothing troubles the great streams
  But light from the pale stars, and gleams
  From the holy orchards, where there is none
  But fruit that is of precious stone,
  Or apples of the sun and moon.

  What were our praise to them: they eat
  Quiet's wild heart, like daily meat,
  Who when night thickens are afloat
  On dappled skins in a glass boat
  Far out under a windless sky,
  While over them birds of Aengus fly,
  And over the tiller and the prow
  And waving white wings to and fro
  Awaken wanderings of light air
  To stir their coverlet and their hair.

  And poets found, old writers say,
  A yew tree where his body lay,
  But a wild apple hid the grass
  With its sweet blossom where hers was;
  And being in good heart, because
  A better time had come again
  After the deaths of many men,
  And that long fighting at the ford,
  They wrote on tablets of thin board,
  Made of the apple and the yew,
  All the love stories that they knew.

  Let rush and bird cry out their fill
  Of the harper's daughter if they will,
  Beloved, I am not afraid of her
  She is not wiser nor lovelier,
  And you are more high of heart than she
  For all her wanderings over-sea;
  But I'd have bird and rush forget
  Those other two, for never yet
  Has lover lived but longed to wive
  Like them that are no more alive.




THE ARROW.


  I thought of your beauty and this arrow
  Made out of a wild thought is in my marrow.
  There's no man may look upon her, no man,
  As when newly grown to be a woman,
  Blossom pale, she pulled down the pale blossom
  At the moth hour and hid it in her bosom.
  This beauty's kinder yet for a reason
  I could weep that the old is out of season.




THE FOLLY OF BEING COMFORTED.


  One that is ever kind said yesterday:
  'Your well beloved's hair has threads of grey
  And little shadows come about her eyes;
  Time can but make it easier to be wise
  Though now it's hard, till trouble is at an end;
  And so be patient, be wise and patient, friend.'
  But heart, there is no comfort, not a grain.
  Time can but make her beauty over again
  Because of that great nobleness of hers;
  The fire that stirs about her, when she stirs
  Burns but more clearly; O she had not these ways
  When all the wild summer was in her gaze.
  O heart, O heart, if she'd but turn her head,
  You'd know the folly of being comforted.




THE WITHERING OF THE BOUGHS.


  I cried when the moon was murmuring to the birds,
  'Let peewit call and curlew cry where they will,
  I long for your merry and tender and pitiful words,
  For the roads are unending and there is no place to my mind.'
  The honey-pale moon lay low on the sleepy hill
  And I fell asleep upon lonely Echtge of streams;
  No boughs have withered because of the wintry wind,
  The boughs have withered because I have told them my dreams.

  I know of the leafy paths that the witches take,
  Who come with their crowns of pearl and their spindles of wool,
  And their secret smile, out of the depths of the lake;
  And of apple islands where the Danaan kind
  Wind and unwind their dances when the light grows cool
  On the island lawns, their feet where the pale foam gleams;
  No boughs have withered because of the wintry wind,
  The boughs have withered because I have told them my dreams.

  I know of the sleepy country, where swans fly round
  Coupled with golden chains and sing as they fly,
  A king and a queen are wandering there, and the sound
  Has made them so happy and hopeless, so deaf and so blind
  With wisdom, they wander till all the years have gone by;
  I know, and the curlew and peewit on Echtge of streams;
  No boughs have withered because of the wintry wind,
  The boughs have withered because I have told them my dreams.




ADAM'S CURSE.


  We sat together at one summer's end
  That beautiful mild woman your close friend
  And you and I, and talked of poetry.

  I said 'a line will take us hours maybe,
  Yet if it does not seem a moment's thought
  Our stitching and unstitching has been naught.
  Better go down upon your marrow bones
  And scrub a kitchen pavement, or break stones
  Like an old pauper in all kinds of weather;
  For to articulate sweet sounds together
  Is to work harder than all these and yet
  Be thought an idler by the noisy set
  Of bankers, schoolmasters, and clergymen
  The martyrs call the world.'

                          That woman then
  Murmured with her young voice, for whose mild sake
  There's many a one shall find out all heartache
  In finding that it's young and mild and low.
  'There is one thing that all we women know
  Although we never heard of it at school,
  That we must labour to be beautiful.'

  I said, 'It's certain there is no fine thing
  Since Adam's fall but needs much labouring.
  There have been lovers who thought love should be
  So much compounded of high courtesy
  That they would sigh and quote with learned looks
  Precedents out of beautiful old books;
  Yet now it seems an idle trade enough.'

  We sat grown quiet at the name of love.
  We saw the last embers of daylight die
  And in the trembling blue-green of the sky
  A moon, worn as if it had been a shell
  Washed by time's waters as they rose and fell
  About the stars and broke in days and years.

  I had a thought for no one's but your ears;
  That you were beautiful and that I strove
  To love you in the old high way of love;
  That it had all seemed happy, and yet we'd grown
  As weary hearted as that hollow moon.




THE SONG OF RED HANRAHAN.


  The old brown thorn trees break in two high over Cummen Strand
  Under a bitter black wind that blows from the left hand,
  Our courage breaks like an old tree in a black wind and dies;
  But we have hidden in our hearts the flame out of the eyes
  Of Cathleen the daughter of Houlihan.

  The wind has bundled up the clouds high over Knocknarea
  And thrown the thunder on the stones for all that Maeve can say.
  Angers that are like noisy clouds have set our hearts abeat;
  But we have all bent low and low and kissed the quiet feet
  Of Cathleen the daughter of Houlihan.

  The yellow pool has overflowed high up on Clooth-na-Bare,
  For the wet winds are blowing out of the clinging air;
  Like heavy flooded waters our bodies and our blood;
  But purer than a tall candle before the Holy Rood
  Is Cathleen the daughter of Houlihan.




THE OLD MEN ADMIRING THEMSELVES IN THE WATER.


  I heard the old, old men say
  'Everything alters,
  And one by one we drop away.'
  They had hands like claws, and their knees
  Were twisted like the old thorn trees
  By the waters.
  I heard the old, old men say
  'All that's beautiful drifts away
  Like the waters.'




UNDER THE MOON.


  I have no happiness in dreaming of Brycelinde;
  Nor Avalon the grass green hollow, nor Joyous Isle,
  Where one found Lancelot crazed and hid him for a while,
  Nor Ulad when Naoise had thrown a sail upon the wind,
  Nor lands that seem too dim to be burdens on the heart,
  Land-under-Wave, where out of the moon's light and the sun's
  Seven old sisters wind the threads of the long lived ones,
  Land-of-the-Tower, where Aengus has thrown the gates apart,
  And Wood-of-Wonders, where one kills an ox at dawn
  To find it when night falls laid on a golden bier:
  Therein are many queens like Branwen, and Guinivere;
  And Niam, and Laban, and Fand, who could change to an otter or fawn
  And the wood-woman whose lover was changed to a blue-eyed hawk;
  And whether I go in my dreams by woodland, or dun, or shore,
  Or on the unpeopled waves with kings to pull at the oar,
  I hear the harp string praise them or hear their mournful talk.
  Because of a story I heard under the thin horn
  Of the third moon, that hung between the night and the day,
  To dream of women whose beauty was folded in dismay,
  Even in an old story, is a burden not to be borne.




THE PLAYERS ASK FOR A BLESSING ON THE PSALTERIES AND THEMSELVES.


  Three Voices together
    Hurry to bless the hands that play,
    The mouths that speak, the notes and strings,
    O masters of the glittering town!
    O! lay the shrilly trumpet down,
    Though drunken with the flags that sway
    Over the ramparts and the towers,
    And with the waving of your wings.
  First Voice
    Maybe they linger by the way;
    One gathers up his purple gown;
    One leans and mutters by the wall;
    He dreads the weight of mortal hours.
  Second Voice
    O no, O no, they hurry down
    Like plovers that have heard the call.
  Third Voice
    O, kinsmen of the Three in One,
    O, kinsmen bless the hands that play.
    The notes they waken shall live on
    When all this heavy history's done.
    Our hands, our hands must ebb away.
  Three Voices together
    The proud and careless notes live on
    But bless our hands that ebb away.




THE RIDER FROM THE NORTH.

From the play of The Country of the Young.


  There's many a strong farmer
  Whose heart would break in two
  If he could see the townland
  That we are riding to;
  Boughs have their fruit and blossom,
  At all times of the year,
  Rivers are running over
  With red beer and brown beer.
  An old man plays the bagpipes
  In a golden and silver wood,
  Queens, their eyes blue like the ice,
  Are dancing in a crowd.
  The little fox he murmured,
  'O what is the world's bane?'
  The sun was laughing sweetly,
  The moon plucked at my rein;
  But the little red fox murmured,
  'O do not pluck at his rein,
  He is riding to the townland
  That is the world's bane.'

  When their hearts are so high,
  That they would come to blows,
  They unhook their heavy swords
  From golden and silver boughs;
  But all that are killed in battle
  Awaken to life again;
  It is lucky that their story
  Is not known among men.
  For O the strong farmers
  That would let the spade lie,
  For their hearts would be like a cup
  That somebody had drunk dry.
  The little fox he murmured,
  'O what is the world's bane?'
  The sun was laughing sweetly,
  The moon plucked at my rein;
  But the little red fox murmured,
  'O do not pluck at his rein,
  He is riding to the townland
  That is the world's bane.'

  Michael will unhook his trumpet
  From a bough overhead,
  And blow a little noise
  When the supper has been spread.
  Gabriel will come from the water
  With a fish tail, and talk
  Of wonders that have happened
  On wet roads where men walk,
  And lift up an old horn
  Of hammered silver, and drink
  Till he has fallen asleep
  Upon the starry brink.
  The little fox he murmured,
  'O what is the world's bane?'
  The sun was laughing sweetly,
  The moon plucked at my rein;
  But the little red fox murmured,
  'O do not pluck at his rein,
  He is riding to the townland,
  That is the world's bane.'

  I made some of these poems walking about
  among the Seven Woods, before the big wind of
  nineteen hundred and three blew down so many
  trees, & troubled the wild creatures, & changed the
  look of things; and I thought out there a good
  part of the play which follows. The first shape of
  it came to me in a dream, but it changed much in
  the making, foreshadowing, it may be, a change
  that may bring a less dream-burdened will into my
  verses. I never re-wrote anything so many times;
  for at first I could not make these wills that stream
  into mere life poetical. But now I hope to do
  easily much more of the kind, and that our new
  Irish players will find the buskin and the sock.


